EPIDEMIOLOGY OF MENTAL DISORDERS
AND PSYCHOSOCIAL PROBLEMS

Schizophrenia
Richard Warner
Medical Director
Mental Health Center of Boulder County and
Associate Professor
University of Colorado
Boulder, CO, USA

Giovanni d e Girolamo
Division of Mental Health
World Health Organization
Geneva, Switzerland

World Health Organization
Geneva
1995

WHO Llbrary Cataloguing ~n Publlcatlon Data
Warner Rlchard
Schlzophren~a/RlchardWarner, Glovannl de Glrolamo
(Epidemiology of mental disorders and psychosoc~alproblems)
1 Sch~zophrenlaI De Glrolamo, Glovannl II Serles
ISBN 92 4 156171 8

(NLM Classification: WM 203)

The World Health Organization welcomes requests for permlsslon to reproduce or translate its publications, in part
or in full. Applicat~onsand enquiries should be addressed to the Offlce of Publications, World Health Organization,
Geneva, Switzerland, which will be glad to provlde the latest information on any changes made to the text, plans for
new edltlons, and reprints and translations already available.

0 World Health Organization 1995
Publications of the World Health Organization enjoy copyright protection in accordance with the provisions of
Protocol 2 of the Universal Copyr~ghtConvention. All rlghts reserved.
The designations employed and the presentation of the material ~nthis publication do not imply the expression of
any oplnlon whatsoever on the part of the Secretariat of the World Health Organ~zatlonconcerning the legal status
of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
The mentlon of specific companies or of certain manufacturers' products does not Imply that they are endorsed or
recommended by the World Health Organization In preference to others of a similar nature that are not mentioned.
Errors and omissions excepted, the names of proprietary products are distlngulshed by initial capital letters.
The authors alone are responsible for the views expressed In thls publication

TYPESET IN INDIA
PRINTED IN ENGLAND
93/9891-Macmillan/Clays-7500

Contents

Preface
Acknowledgements
Acronyms and abbreviations used in this book
1. Introduction

2. Diagnostic issues
2.1 Relevance of diagnostic issues for epidemiological research
2.2 ICD-I0 classification of schizophrenia
2.3 DSM-111-R and DSM-IV classifications of schizophrenia
2.4 Similarities and dissimilarities between ICD-10, DSM-111-R
and DSM-IV
2.5 Assessment methods
2.6 Case-finding methods

3. Epidemiology of schizophrenia
3.1 Incidence studies
3.1.1 The NIMH Epidemiologic Catchment Area study
3.1.2 The WHO Study on the Determinants of the Outcome
of Severe Mental Disorders
3.1.3 Incidence in developing countries
3.1.4 Pockets of high incidence
3.1.5 Differences in age of onset for males and females
3.2 Prevalence studies
3.2.1 Community studies
3.2.2 Prevalence in developing countries
3.2.3 Pockets of high and low prevalence
3.2.4 The Epidemiologic Catchment Area study
3.2.5 Family and twin studies
3.2.6 Season of birth
3.2.7 Prevalence in different socioeconomic groups
3.2.8 Other risk factors
3.3 Epidemiological studies in primary health care facilities
3.4 Epidemiological studies in psychiatric facilities

Schizophrenia

3.5 Epidemiological studies in other facilities or among special
population groups
3.5.1 Prisoners
3.5.2 The homeless
3.6 Epidemiological research and the etiology of schizophrenia
3.6.1 Implications of neuroanatomical and neurophysiological
research
3.6.2 Studies of high-risk groups

4. Temporal trends

63
63
64
64
64
67
68

4.1 Was schizophrenia rare before the eighteenth century?
4.2 Is the incidence of schizophrenia on the decline?
4.3 Changes in the clinical picture of schizophrenia
5. Conclusions and recommendations for future studies

76

5.1 Methodological issues
5.2 High-risk studies
5.3 Geographical stability of incidence
5.4 Temporal changes in incidence
5.5 Sex differences
5.6 Social class and urbanization
5.7 Immigrant status
5.8 CO-occurring illnesses
5.9 Categorical versus continuous models
5.10 Social and biological risk factors
References
Annex 1
Clinical descriptions and diagnostic guidelines
Annex 2
Diagnostic criteria for research

81

Preface

Psychiatric illness is common and can have serious consequences. It has been
estimated that as many as 500 million people may be suffering from some kind
of mental disorder or impairment (WHO, 1992a). In many countries 40% of
disabled people owe their disability to mental disorders. Epidemiological
predictions concerning mental illness show that there is every probability that
the magnitude of mental health problems will increase in the future, as a result
of various factors, including the increasing life expectancy of those with a
mental disorder or disability and the growing number of people reaching the
ages in which the risk of mental disorder is high.
The magnitude of mental health problems far exceeds that of the resources
available for their resolution. In most parts of the world services which could
help people who suffer from mental disorders are insufficient in both quality
and quantity. This is often true even in the most highly developed countries.
The general public and most of the professional medical community-often
including psychiatrists-are insufficiently aware of the extent and nature of
mental disorders and of the burden which these disorders represent for the
individuals who suffer from them, their families and their communities.
Traditional health statistical services in most countries are unable to provide
accurate information about the extent of mental health problems in their
populations. Most S tatistics routinely collected by health statistical services are
based on mortality, which may lead to a distorted picture of the health status of
a population since diseases of long duration that do not necessarily end in
death-including many mental and neurological conditions-do not show up
in such statistics. Lack of awareness of the magnitude and nature of mental
health problems and of the availability of effective means of preventing or
treating them is the cause of the low priority given to mental health
programmes in most countries.
If health priorities are to be chosen properly, it is essential for accurate
information to be available on the incidence and prevalence of mental and
neurological disorders in the community and in general health facilities, their
variation across countries and cultures and over time, their sociodemographic
characteristics and the risk factors associated with their occurrence.
Unfortunately, reliable and comparable epidemiological data on mental
and neurological disorders are scarce. Two of the reasons for the paucity of such
data are particularly important: (1) the inadequacy of the training received by
general health care personnel (and the absence of biological markers of mental
illness) leads to a low recognition rate of mental health problems in their

Schizobhrenia

patients; and (2) the absence until recently of a "common languagencomprising a nomenclature, an agreed diagnostic system, and standardized
instruments for the assessment of these disorders-means that the data that
have been collected are not truly comparable.
Ideally, a series of cross-cultural surveys should be carried out for welldefined conditions or groups of conditions in order to advance our knowledge of
the epidemiology of mental health problems. Over the past 20 years considerable progress has been made in developing the methodology for carrying
out such work. WHO has played an important role in this field: with the
publication of diagnostic guidelines accompanying Chapter V of ICD-10
(WHO, 1992b), a widely tested and accepted diagnostic system has become
available; WHO has also contributed to the development of instruments for the
standardized assessment of psychopathology, including the Composite International Diagnostic Interview (CIDI) (Robins et al., 1988), the Schedules
for Clinical Assessment in Neuropsychiatry (SCAN) (Wing et al., 1990), and
the International Personality Disorder Examination (IPDE) (Loranger et al.,
1991), and developed a network of centres in which training in their use can be
obtained. In addition, WHO has carried out cross-cultural clinical and epidemiological research which has demonstrated that such work is feasible, and
established research teams and centres in which further related work can be
carried out.
Some countries have conducted major epidemiological studies in recent
years (e.g. Brazil, China, USA), but data on the epidemiology of mental
disorders are still scarce and difficult to obtain. For these reasons, WHO
decided to produce a series of monographs, each of which discusses epidemiological data on a specific disorder (or group of related disorders). Special
attention is given to epidemiological data gathered in developing countries,
which are often neglected in epidemiological reviews published in scientific
journals. As shown in several major WHO epidemiological studies (e.g. the
International Pilot Study of Schizophrenia (WHO, 1979); the study on
depression in different cultures (Sartorius et al., 1983); the study on the
determinants of the outcome of severe mental disorders (Jablensky et al., 1992);
the study on pathways to psychiatric care (Gater et al., 1991); and the study on
ill-defined psychological disorders in general medical settings (Sartorius et al.,
1990)), the comparison of epidemiological data obtained in developing
countries, or in countries that do not have a long tradition of epidemiological
research, with those gathered in developed countries, or in countries with a
stronger tradition of such research, can provide valuable insights into the very
nature of the disorders-their causes, form, course and outcome.
All these monographs are similar in format: they review issues related to
diagnosis and classification, with special reference to ICD-10, as well as the
standardized instruments available and used for the assessment of mental
disorders. Incidence and prevalence studies carried out in the general population, in primary care settings, and in psychiatric settings, as well as in other
institutions such as nursing homes, prisons, etc., are also reviewed. The main
risk factors for the disorder, or group of disorders, are then discussed, and data

Preface
on time trends in the prevalence and incidence of the disorder given where
available. Each monograph ends with conclusions and recommendations for
future studies.
I t is hoped that these monographs will help research and health institutions,
health planners, clinicians, and those concerned with informing the general
public to understand better the magnitude of the problems they have to face, to
develop effective preventive strategies and to build appropriate and humane
care-delivery systems.

W. Gulbinat
Division o f M e n t a l Health
W o r l d Health Organization

References
Gater R et al. (1991) The pathway study. Psychological medicine, 21: 761-774.
Jablensky A et al. (1992) Schizophrenia: manifestations, incidence and course in
different cultures. A World Health Organization ten-country study. Psychological
medicine, Suppl. 20.
Loranger AW et al. (1991) The WHOJADAMHA International Pilot Study of
Personality Disorders: background and purpose. Journal of personality disorders, 5:
296-306.
Robins LN et al. (1988) The Composite International Diagnostic Interview. Archives of
general psychiatry, 45: 1069- 1076.
Sartorius N et al. (1983) Depressive disorders in dzfferent cultures. Geneva, World Health
Organization.
Sartorius N et al., eds. (1990) Psychological disorders in general medical settings. Berne,
Huber.
WHO (1979) Schizophrenia: an international follow-up study. Chichester, Wiley.
l

WHO (1992a) Global health situation and projections estimates. Geneva, World Health
Organization (unpublished document WHOJHSTJ92.1; available on request from
Division of Epidemiological Surveillance and Health Situation and Trend Assessment, World Health Organization, 1211 Geneva 27, Switzerland).
WHO (1992b) The ZCD-l0 Classijication of Mental and Behavioural Disorders. Clinical
descriptions and diagnostic guidelines. Geneva, World Health Organization.
Wing JK et al. (1990) SCAN: Schedules for Clinical Assessment in Neuropsychiatry.
Archives of general psychiatry, 47: 589-593.

vii

Acknowledgements

The authors thank the following for reviewing the manuscript and for their
valuable comments and suggestions: Dr W.W. Eaton, Department of Mental
Hygiene, School of Hygiene and Public Health, Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, MD, USA; Professor H. Hafner, Central Institute for Mental
Health, Mannheim, Germany; Professor A. S. Henderson, Social Psychiatry
Unit, National Health and Medical Research Council, Australian National
University, Canberra, Australia; Professor A. Jablensky, University Department of Psychiatry and Behavioural Sciences, Royal Perth Hospital, Perth,
Australia; Professor J. Leff, MRC Social and Community Psychiatry Unit,
Institute of Psychiatry, London, England; Dr P. Munk-Jerrgensen, Department
of Psychiatric Demography, Institute ofBasic Psychiatric Research, University
of Aarhus, Denmark; and Professor J. Wing, Research Unit, Royal College of
Psychiatrists, London, England. Thanks are also due to Professor N.C.
Andreasen, Department of Psychiatry, University of Iowa Hospitals and
Clinics, Iowa City, USA, and to Professor T. McGlashan, Yale Psychiatric
Institute and Department of Psychiatry, Yale University, New Haven, USA,
for their help with regard to the DSM-IV classification of schizophrenia; to
Professor D. Goldberg, Institute of Psychiatry, London, England, for his
comments on the epidemiology of schizophrenia in primary health care
facilities; and to Professor N. Sartorius, formerly Director, Division of Mental
Health, WHO, Geneva, for his valuable input and his continuous encouragement and support.

Acronyms and abbreviations used
in this book

CID1
CT
DIS
DOSMED
DSM-I11

DSM-IV
ECA
ICD-8

IQ
MRI
NIMH
PET
PSE
RDC
SADS
SCAN
SCID
SD

Composite International Diagnostic Interview
Computerized tomography
Diagnostic Interview Schedule
Determinants of Outcome of Severe Mental Disorders
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 3rd
ed.
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 3rd
ed. (revised)
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th
ed.
Epidemiologic Catchment Area
Manual of the International Statistical Classijication of Diseases, Injuries and Causes of Death. Eighth revision.
Manual of the International Statistical Classijication of Diseases, Injuries and Causes of Death. Ninth revision.
International Statistical Classijication of Diseases and Related
Health Problems. Tenth revision.
Intelligence quotient
Magnetic resonance imaging
National Institute of Mental Health
Positron emission tomography
Present State Examination
Research Diagnostic Criteria
Schedule for Affective Disorders and Schizophrenia
Schedules for Clinical Assessment in Neuropsychiatry
Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-111-R
Standard deviation

l

I

l

I

Introduction

Schizophrenia is a severe psychiatric disorder. The disease usually starts in
adolescence or early adult life and often becomes chronic and disabling. The
overall direct and indirect costs of the disorder are huge. According to one
estimate, the treatment of schizophrenia in the United States, excluding
indirect expenses, costs close to 0.5% of the gross national product (Gunderson
& Mosher, 1975). The burden on the patient's family is heavy and both the
patient and his or her relatives are often exposed to the stigma associated with
the illness, sometimes over generations. Thus schizophrenia is a major public
health problem.
The World Health Organization has focused special attention on schizophrenia, and has organized a number of studies aimed at improving understanding of the disorder and finding ways to deal with it. The WHO
programme of collaborative clinical and epidemiological research on schizophrenia started in the late 1960s. Its first task was to develop a reliable
methodology for comparative cross-cultural studies in different populations.
This monograph is a continuation of the previous work of the Organization
in this area of enquiry, and aims to provide a broad overview of current
knowledge about the epidemiology of schizophrenia. It starts with an examination of relevant diagnostic and methodological issues. Incidence and
prevalence studies of schizophrenia are then reviewed, and similarities and
differences in rates across different populations discussed. Risk factors for
schizophrenia and temporal trends in the occurrence of the disorder are
considered, with special emphasis on etiology. Finally, recommendations are
made for future studies.

Diagnostic issues

Until the end of the eighteenth century, it was believed that all mental disorders
were expressions of a single pathological entity, termed Einheitspsychose by the
German alienists Zeller and Griesinger (Glatzel, 1990). Pine1 was one of the
earliest to recognize that mental disorders could be separated and classified
according to their different features, distinguishing between dementia, idiocy,
mania and melancholia. The French psychiatrist Morel was another important
figure in this psychiatric school. In 1852, Morel gave the name dimencepricoce to
a disorder leading initially to emotional withdrawal, odd mannerisms and selfneglect, and eventually to intellectual deterioration. Shortly after Morel, the
German psychiatrists Hecker and Kahlbaum, in 1871 and 1883 respectively,
described the syndromes of catatonia and hebephrenia.
The German psychiatrist, Emil Kraepelin, laid the foundations for the
modern concept of schizophrenia. Studying patients admitted to mental
hospitals in the late nineteenth century, he observed that certain types of
insanity with an onset in early adult life and initially rather varied features,
seemed to progress ultimately to a similar deteriorated condition. To accentuate the progressive deterioration of mental abilities, of emotional responses and
of the integrity of the personality which he saw as central to this condition,
Kraepelin termed it "dementia praecox" (dementia of early life). In 1896, in
the fifth edition of his textbook, he suggested that three conditions, previously
regarded as separate, were in fact subtypes of this single disease entity, which he
distinguished from manic-depressive illness (Sass, 1987). The three conditions
were hebephrenia, marked by aimless, disorganized and incongruous behaviour; catatonia, in which the individual might be negativistic, motionless or
even stuporose, or, at other times, extremely agitated and incoherent; and,
finally, dementia paranoides, in which delusions of persecution and grandeur
were predominant. Kraepelin regarded dementia praecox as a condition
characterized by a deteriorating, inevitably negative course and outcome, even
though some 12% of his patients recovered more or less completely.
A few years later, the Swiss psychiatrist Eugen Bleuler made important
contributions to the concept of the disorder. In 1908, he proposed the name
"schizophrenia" to denote a splitting of psychic functions which he considered
to be of paramount importance. He made a distinction between fundamental
and accessory symptoms: the former included disturbances of thought associations, abnormal emotional reactions and a disturbance of volition. Accessory
symptoms included hallucinations, delusions, catatonia, and abnormal and
incomprehensible behaviour. Ambivalence and a new concept which Bleuler

l

!

I

2. Diagnostic issues

named "autismv-living in a fantasy world-were important features in his
clinical description of the illness. In 1911, Bleuler published a monograph in
which he emphasized that schizophrenia was a group of disorders rather than a
single entity. He accepted Kraepelin's original three subgroups and added a
fourth: simple schizophrenia. Bleuler's view of outcome in schizophrenia was
substantially less pessimistic than that of Kraepelin, and he contended that,
although full recovery from the disease was a rare occurrence, far-reaching
improvement was common. Whereas Kraepelin emphasized the phenomenology of the disorder, Bleuler was more interpretative and gave special emphasis
to the meaning of the symptoms (Bland & Kolada, 1988). Neither author,
however, despite their detailed investigations, provided clear-cut diagnostic
criteria for the condition.
After Bleuler, the German psychiatrist Kurt Schneider (1959) identified a
group of eleven symptoms which he believed were pathognomonic of schizophrenia, and were rarely found in other psychiatric disorders. He called them
"first-rank symptoms" - "not because we think of them as basic disturbances,
but because they have this special value in helping us to determine the diagnosis
of schizophrenia . . . Symptoms of first rank importance do not always have to
be present for a diagnosis to be made" (Schneider, 1959). Schneider's first-rank
symptoms included hearing one's thoughts spoken aloud, auditory hallucinations that comment on one's behaviour, thought withdrawal or insertion,
thought broadcasting and the feeling that one's actions are influenced by
external agents. Schneider also identified a subset of symptoms which he called
"second-rank symptoms"; they include other types of hallucinations, perplexity, sudden delusional ideas, depressive or euphoric mood changes and
emotional blunting. He argued that schizophrenia can be diagnosed on the
basis of the second-rank symptoms alone if they are sufficient in number.
The first-rank symptoms proposed by Schneider narrowed the concept of
schizophrenia and have retained a crucial role in subsequent diagnostic
systems: some of them are included in the ICD-10 and DSM-I11 diagnostic
criteria for schizophrenia. Despite the great importance that has been placed
on first-rank symptoms for the diagnosis of schizophrenia, their frequency in
patients with this diagnosis varies significantly. In 13 studies reviewed by
Fenton et al. (1981), the prevalence of first-rank symptoms ranged from a low
of 24% to a high of 72% with a median value of 5 1 %. Wulff ( 1967) suggested
that the prevalence of first-rank symptoms is lower in patients from developing
countries. This view is supported by a prospective study in which 169 patients
in Sri Lanka, assessed with the Present State Examination (PSE), were
compared with patients from two developed countries (Chandrasena, 1987). In
the WHO Study on the Determinants of Outcome of Severe Mental Disorders
(DOSMED) (Jablensky et al., 1992), an average of 56% of the patients with a
clinical diagnosis of schizophrenia in the different centres exhibited one or more
of the first-rank symptoms; these symptoms defined a subpopulation of
schizophrenic patients characterized by elevated scores on positive psychotic
symptoms. These patients showed a greater similarity across cultures than the
total study population.

Schizophrenia

The specificity of first-rank symptoms has been disputed because they can
be found in other disorders, especially mania (Carpenter & Strauss, 1974; Pope
& Lipinski, 1978; Taylor & Abrams, 1975). Among the first-rank symptoms,
the least discriminating is the "third person" hallucination - a voice or voices
referring to the subject in the third person (Mellor, 1982).
In the Scandinavian countries an important contribution to the diagnostic
concept of schizophrenia came in the 1930s from the Norwegian psychiatrist,
Langfeldt. He distinguished between a core group of "process" or "nuclear"
schizophrenics, who demonstrated an insidious onset of illness and a deteriorating course, and a "reactive" group, who tended to show signs of better
social functioning before becoming psychotic, to have a more acute onset, often
precipitated by stress, and to display a better prognosis. Following Langfeldt,
reactive psychoses have been separated from "true" schizophrenia in Scandinavian psychiatric terminology and named "schizophreniform psychoses".
In France, one feature of the diagnostic tradition for schizophrenia has been
the narrowing of the diagnosis and a corresponding increase in the number of
nonschizophrenic delusional states (Pichot, 1990).The purpose
of this differentiation is to emphasize the importance of a deteriorating course in making
a diagnosis of "true" schizophrenia. A recent study (van 0 s et al., 1993)
confirmed that psychiatrists in France and the United Kingdom use different
diagnostic criteria. Responses to a questionnaire revealed that French psychiatrists are reluctant to diagnose schizophrenia in patients over 45 years of
age. Despite the narrowing of the diagnosis to exclude good-prognosis or older
cases, however, the French diagnosis of schizophrenia appears overall to be
broader than in the United Kingdom. French psychiatrists use a Bleulerian
psychoanalytic diagnostic approach which encompasses a variety of chronic
states that would be excluded in the United Kingdom for lack of specific
symptoms. They recognize, for example, a "pseudopsychopathic" subtype of
schizophrenia. The current French approach is in many ways reminiscent of
American diagnostic practices prior to the introduction of standardized criteria
in the 1970s (van 0 s et al., 1993).
In the United States of America from 1950 until the mid-1970s, psychiatrists paid little attention to the issue of course in diagnosing schizophrenia and
emphasized instead the presence of supposedly schizophrenic symptoms and
defects. The result was an over-inclusive pattern of diagnosis for schizophrenia
in comparison with European approaches. American psychiatrists referred
mainly, in their diagnostic practice, to the Bleulerian "four As": disturbances of
association between thoughts, disturbances of affect, autism, and morbid
ambivalence.
The differences that existed between national diagnostic systems for
schizophrenia, and in particular between the American and the European
approaches, were clearly demonstrated in the 1960s by an international
research project carried out in New York and London (Cooper et al., 1972).
The study, which was stimulated by the work of Morton Kramer (Kramer,
1969; Kramer et al., 1961), examined hundreds of patients admitted to
hospitals in these two cities and noted their hospital diagnoses. It was found

2. Diagnostic issues

that American psychiatrists were about twice as likely as the research team to
diagnose schizophrenia, four times less likely to diagnose psychotic depression
and ten times less likely to label a psychotic patient as suffering from mania.
The diagnoses given by the psychiatrists working in London hospitals, as might
be expected, were very close to those of the project psychiatrists (who were
using a British diagnostic approach). Plainly, at that time, American psychiatrists were labelling as schizophrenic patients who would have been
considered manic-depressive in the United Kingdom and in other European
countries.
The problem of diagnostic variation between countries can be seen in
broader cross-cultural perspective in the findings of the International Pilot
Study of Schizophrenia (WHO, 1973, 1979). Using a standardized assessment
(the Present State Examination, 9th edition) and diagnostic approach (based
on ICD-8 and incorporated in the CATEGO computer program), the project
evaluated the symptoms of psychotic patients admitted to treatment in nine
centres in developed and developing countries-China (Province of Taiwan),
Colombia, Czechoslovakia, Denmark, India, Nigeria, the United Kingdom,
the United States and the USSR. Comparing the diagnoses made by the local
hospital psychiatrists with the uniform research method, the project revealed
that the diagnosis of psychosis in general, and schizophrenia in particular, was
reasonably similar in the European and developing country centres. O n the
other hand, the Soviet and American diagnostic approaches were very different
from those of the other centres. A large proportion of the patients who were
labelled schizophrenic by psychiatrists in Moscow and Washington did not
meet the research definition and would have been diagnosed as suffering from
manic-depressive psychosis or a neurosis elsewhere in the world. The study
confirmed that the diagnosis of schizophrenia was made differently in Europe
than in the United States. In Europe, psychiatrists tended to use the diagnosis
cautiously to refer to a small subset of patients with hallucinations and
delusions not explicable in terms of affective disturbances during the first
attack. In the United States, at that time, and to some extent in the USSR, the
concept of schizophrenia traditionally included anyone with any type of
hallucination or delusion, or with odd or incomprehensible behaviour.
The diagnostic approaches of American psychiatrists changed suddenly
and radically in the mid-1970s. Much greater attention was paid to discriminating manic-depressive illness from schizophrenia and within a few years,
different operational criteria for the diagnosis of schizophrenia appeared. In
1972, Feighner and associates published their diagnostic criteria based on
patient, family and follow-up studies, while Astrachan and co-workers (1972)
tried to devise a reliable checklist for making such diagnoses. Later developments included the Research Diagnostic Criteria (RDC) (Spitzer et al.,
1977) and finally, in 1980, the third edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-111) (American Psychiatric Association,
1980).
As Andreasen & Flaum (1991) point out, the introduction of the new
criteria represented an attempt to reverse the previous trend and to narrow the

Schizophrenia

diagnostic criteria, essentially by two means: by introducing a six-month
duration criterion, and by giving prominence to florid or positive symptoms
with correspondingly less importance being given to deficit, negative (or
"Bleulerian") symptoms.

2.1 Relevance of diagnostic issues for epidemiological research
The diagnostic issues discussed above are of critical importance for epidemiological research because changing the classification and diagnostic
criteria for schizophrenia can significantly affect the prevalence of the disorder
detected in community studies or treated samples. The differences between the
various diagnostic systems are a result of the choice of symptom criteria, the
structure of diagnostic algorithms, the duration criteria and the evaluation of
affective symptoms. There are more than ten comparative studies using over a
dozen diagnostic definitions of schizophrenia, showing that detected rates of the
disorder depend on the diagnostic criteria adopted (Sass, 1987). In one of the
most important of these studies, Endicott et al. (1982) compared the joint
frequencies and reliabilities of six sets of diagnostic criteria (New Haven,
Carpenter, Feighner, Taylor & Abrams, DSM-I11 and RDC) in a sample of
108 patients. The six systems were comparable in terms of reliability but the
proportion of cases diagnosed as schizophrenia ranged between 4% and 26%
depending on the diagnostic system, with RDC, DSM-I11 and Carpenter
criteria being close to one another. The main reasons for the differences were
related to (a) the criteria for exclusion of patients with affective disorders, (b)
the duration criterion adopted, and (c) the degree of specificity of each item (for
example, "hallucinations" versus "hallucinations of two or more voices
conversing"). In another study, Brockington et al. (1978),comparing different
sets of diagnostic criteria, found that the rate of schizophrenia in a series of 119
patients on first admission for psychiatric care varied between 3.4% and 38%
depending on the criteria. RDC, CATEGO, Carpenter and Langfeldt's criteria
showed good concordance.
The critical importance of the diagnostic criteria for the rate of schizophrenia found in community epidemiological studies has been clearly demonstrated by Helzer (1988). Using data from the St Louis site of the Epidemiologic
Catchment Area (ECA) study, the author showed that a fivefold difference in
the prevalence estimates was found when the Feighner, RDC and DSM-I11
criteria were applied to the same data set. This fivefold difference was of the
same magnitude as that found by Dunham (1965) in his review of prevalence
rates of schizophrenia in various European and North American countries.
Thus differences ofsuch a magnitude could be entirely related to the definitions
used.
Other studies have demonstrated that a change in diagnostic habits can
explain apparent variations over time in rates of schizophrenia among
psychiatric patients. Kuriansky et al. (1974) found that 77% of patients
admitted to the New York State Psychiatric Institute during the late 1940s and

2. Diaenostic issues

early 1950s were diagnosed as schizophrenic, compared with fewer than 28% of
the admissions to the same hospital during the 1930s. Re-examination of the
clinical data in the hospital records and rediagnosis of the cases indicated that
the psychiatrists in the later period used a broader definition of schizophrenia.
A survey carried out in one of the largest university-affiliated psychiatric
hospitals in the USA (Loranger, 1990) compared the diagnoses given to 5143
patients in the last five years of the DSM-I1 era (1975-79) with those given in
the first five years of the DSM-I11 era (1981-85) (5771 patients), and found a
marked decrease in the diagnosis of schizophrenia, from 25% to 13%, together
with an increase in the diagnosis of personality disorders and affective
disorders. Many of the cases diagnosed as schizophreniform, atypical psychosis,
reactive psychosis, and schizotypal personality disorder according to DSM-I11
criteria would have been diagnosed as schizophrenia with the DSM-11.
However, all of these new categories combined accounted for only 5.3% of the
total DSM-I11 sample and explain less than half the decline in the diagnosis of
schizophrenia. The large increase in the diagnosis of affective disorders appears
to have been the primary reason for the decrease in schizophrenia diagnoses.
Unipolar depression rose from 15% to 25 %, and bipolar disorder rose from 7%
to 11%. The study confirms the previously noted tendency for American
psychiatrists in the pre-DSM-I11 era to diagnose schizophrenia in cases where
European psychiatrists would have made a diagnosis of affective disorder.
In another study, data on discharge diagnoses from 1972 to 1988 were
gathered from six North American psychiatric teaching hospitals, and rates for
schizophrenia and major mood disorders were evaluated (Stoll et al., 1993).
Large reciprocal shifts in the frequencies of diagnoses of schizophrenia and
major affective disorders were found. Beginning in the early 1970s, a gradual
increase in the frequency of diagnoses of major affective disorders at all sites was
accompanied by a corresponding decrease in diagnoses of schizophrenia at five
of the six centres. Schizophrenia diagnoses decreased from a peak of 27% in
1976 to 9% in 1989 (a threefold decrease), while diagnoses of major affective
disorders rose from a low of 10% in 1972 to 44% in 1990 (a fourfold increase).
Among the reasons for this substantial shift, the authors include the narrowing
in the DSM-I11 definition of schizophrenia and broadening in the category of
major affective disorders.

2.2 ICD-10 classification of schizophrenia
Table 1 lists the group ofschizophrenic disorders as classified by ICD- 10, DSM111-R (American Psychiatric Association, 1987) and DSM-IV (American
Psychiatric Association, 1994). Annex 1 shows the ICD- 10 clinical descriptions
and diagnostic guidelines for the disorder.
A number of diagnostic issues in the ICD-10 classification of schizophrenic
disorders merit comment. First, the group of schizophrenia, schizotypal states
and delusional disorders (F20-F29) has been expanded by the introduction of
new categories such as undifferentiated schizophrenia, post-schizophrenic

Table 1
Classification of schizophrenia and schizophrenia-like disorders i n ICD-10,
DSM-Ill-R and DSM-IV
DSM-IV
Schizophrenia
Paranoid
Hebephrenic
Catatonic
Undifferentiated
Residual
Post-schizophrenic depression

Schizophrenia
Paranoid
Disorganized
Catatonic
Undifferentiated
Residual

Schizophrenia
Paranoid
Disorganized
Catatonic
Undifferentiated
Residual
Postpsychotic depression of
schizophrenia
Simple deterioration disorder
(simple schizophrenia)

Delusional (paranoid)
disorder

Delusional disorder

Brief reactive psychosis

Brief psychotic disorder

Schizophreniform disorder

Schizophreniform disorder

lnduced psychotic disorder
Schizoaffective disorders

lnduced psychotic disorder
Schizoaffective disorder

Psychotic disorder not otherwise specified

Secondary psychotic disorder
due to a general medical condition
-with delusions
-with hallucinations
Substance-induced psychotic
disorder
Psychotic disorder not otherwise specified

Simple
Other schizophrenia
Schizophrenia, unspecified
Schizotypal disorder
Persistent delusional disorder

Acute and transient psychotic
disorder
Acute polymorphic psychotic
disorder without symptoms of
schizophrenia
Acute polymorphic psychotic
disorder with symptoms of
schizophrenia
Acute schizophrenia-like
psychotic disorder
Other acute predominantly delusional psychotic disorders
Other acute and trans~ent
psychotic disorders
Acute and transient psychotic
disorders unspecified
lnduced delusional disorder
Schizoaffective disorders
Other nonorganic psychotic
disorders

Unspecified nonorganic
psychoses

depression and schizotypal disorder. Schizotypal states are of two types, namely
schizotypal disorder and simple schizophrenia; the latter refers to a disorder
with an insidious development of negative symptoms without delusions or
hallucinations. After long debate, it was determined that schizoaffective
disorders (F25), as defined in the ICD-10, should be placed in the same group

2. Diagnostic issues

as schizophrenia, rather than with affective disorders (F30-F39). For a
diagnosis of schizoaffective disorder at least one typically schizophrenic
symptom must be present with affective symptoms during the same episode.
An important issue is the duration of symptoms required to distinguish
schizophrenia from acute and transient psychotic disorders (F23). Several
authors have stressed the high frequency of these disorders in developing
countries and the need to classify them adequately (Wig & Parhee, 1989). In
ICD-10 the diagnosis of schizophrenia requires the presence of typical delusions, hallucinations or other symptoms for a minimum of one month. There
are strong clinical traditions in several countries, based upon descriptive
though not epidemiological studies, suggesting that Kraepelin's dementia
praecox and Bleuler's schizophrenias are distinct from acute psychoses with
abrupt onset, a short course of a few weeks or days, and a favourable outcome.
Terms such as boufie dilirante, psychogenic psychosis, schizophreniform psychosis, cycloid psychosis and brief reactive psychosis indicate the widespread
opinion that this form of psychosis should be considered as distinct from
schizophrenia. Opinions and evidence vary as to whether these disorders are
usually or always associated with acute psychological stress and whether they
may occur with transient but typical schizophrenic symptoms. (Boufie dilirante,
at least, was originally described as not usually being associated with an
obvious psychological precipitant.) In the present state of knowledge about
schizophrenia and these more acute disorders, it was considered that the best
option would be to allow sufficient time for the disorder to appear, be
recognized and largely subside before considering a diagnosis of schizophrenia.
Most clinical reports and authorities suggest that the large majority of patients
with acute transient psychoses have an onset of psychotic symptoms over a few
days, at most two weeks, and that many recover with or without medication
within 2-3 weeks. I t seemed appropriate, therefore, to specify at least one
month of clear and typical schizophrenic symptoms before the disorder can be
diagnosed as schizophrenia.
The adoption of a criterion of only one month's duration of typical
psychotic symptoms for the diagnosis of schizophrenia rejects the assumption
that schizophrenia must be of comparatively long duration. A duration of six
months has been adopted in several national classifications, but for the ICD-10
it was felt that there are no advantages in restricting the diagnosis of
schizophrenia in this way. In two WHO studies-the International Pilot Study
of Schizophrenia and the Determinants of Outcome of Severe Mental Disorders-a substantial proportion of patients had clear and typical schizophrenic symptoms for more than one month but less than six months, and
made good if not complete recoveries from the disorder. It therefore seemed
appropriate to avoid assumptions about chronicity and regard schizophrenia as
a descriptive term for a syndrome that has a variety of causes (many of which
are still unknown) and a variety of outcomes, depending upon the balance of
genetic, physical, social and cultural influences.
The term "schizophreniform" has not been used for a defined disorder in
the ICD-10 classification. This is because it has been applied to several different

Schizophrenia

clinical concepts over the past few decades, and associated with a variety of
characteristics such as acute onset, relatively brief duration, atypical symptoms
or mixtures of symptoms, and comparatively good outcome. There is, as yet, no
evidence in favour of a preferred choice of usage, so the case for its inclusion as a
diagnostic term was considered to be weak. The need for an intermediate
category of this type, moreover, was removed by the inclusion of the category of
acute and transient psychotic disorders (F23) and its subdivisions, together
with the requirement for one month of psychotic symptoms for a diagnosis of
schizophrenia.
During the preparation of ICD-10, a large number of clinical field trials
were conducted to establish inter-rater reliability. Two methods of estimating
inter-rater reliability were calculated: pair-wise agreement rates and kappa
coefficients (Sartorius et al., 1993).A total of 557 clinicians at 95 clinical centres
in 33 different countries participated in the joint assessment phase of the draft of
ICD-10. They made 9012 assessments for 2385 patients ofwidely varying ages.
Male and female patients were represented approximately equally in the field
trials.
For the group schizophrenia, schizotypal and delusional disorders
(F20-F29), the kappa coefficient was satisfactory (0.82). The agreement for
diagnoses at the three-character category level varied according to the
category, with a high value for schizophrenia (0.81) and lower values for other
diagnoses (e.g. 0.46 for schizotypal states). (By comparison, we may note that
in a review of prior studies reporting the reliability of a clinical diagnosis of
schizophrenia, Spitzer & Fleiss (1974) found the average kappa coefficient to
be no better than 0.57.) For the four-character categories of schizophrenic
disorders, the kappa values were also variable, with acceptable values for
paranoid schizophrenia (0.73) and hebephrenic schizophrenia (0.65), and a
low value for undifferentiated schizophrenia (0.44).
For each diagnostic assessment, clinicians were also asked to make a rating
on the following scales: (a) goodness of fit of the diagnostic category with the
case observed, (b) confidence in use of diagnosis, (c) ease or difficulty of
diagnosis, and (d) adequacy of clinical description and diagnostic guidelines.
The main diagnostic problems were found to be with schizotypal disorder,
acute schizophrenia-like disorder and other acute psychotic disorders, while the
specific ICD-10 categories of schizophrenia were rated as satisfactory.

2.3

DSM-Ill-R and DSM-IV classifications of schizophrenia

DSM-111-R classifies schizophrenia according to the symptoms of the acute
phase and the course of the illness. A course requirement for the diagnosis is the
presence of continuous signs of disturbance for at least six months. The acute
symptoms (criterion A) are divided into three sets. The first set includes
delusions, hallucinations, incoherence or marked loosening of associations,
catatonic behaviour, and flat or inappropriate affect. The second set consists of
"bizarre" delusions which would seem implausible to other members of the

l

I
I

I

I

2. Diagnostic issues

same cultural group (e.g. thought-broadcasting or being controlled by a dead
person). The third set consists of special kinds of auditory hallucinations. Thus,
for a diagnosis of schizophrenia according to DSM-111-R criteria, the presence
of positive psychotic symptoms (delusions, hallucinations, or thought disorder)
is required.
Compared with the DSM-111, the DSM-111-R criteria for schizophrenia
were simplified through a reduction of the subcategories in criterion A from six
items to three. The diagnosis remained complex, however, as the clinician had
to assess the presence of at least 12 different signs and symptoms. While DSMI11 contained no duration requirement for the acute symptoms in criterion A,
DSM-111-R required the presence of one or more such symptoms for at least
one week. The requirement that affective disorder should be excluded was
moved from a subsidiary position in DSM-I11 to a central position in DSM-IIIR, where it is equal in importance with delusions, hallucinations, thought
disorder, and catatonic behaviour. Among the prodromal or residual symptoms was included a marked lack of initiative, interest or energy. The B
criterion, concerning deterioration in functioning was broadened in DSM-IIIR to include failure to achieve expected level of social development. The age
criterion for schizophrenia ("onset of prodromal or active phase of illness before
age 45") was eliminated from DSM-111-R. As Andreasen & Flaum (1991)
pointed out, the net effect of these changes appeared to be a further narrowing
of the definition of schizophrenia in DSM-111-R. Other changes were made to
the diagnostic criteria for delusional (paranoid) disorders, brief reactive
psychosis, schizophreniform disorder and schizoaffective disorder (Kendler et
al., 1989).
The new DSM-IV requires one month of active A criterion symptoms, like
ICD-10 and unlike the one week required by DSM-111-R. On the other hand,
DSM-IV, like DSM-111-R, requires a total duration of 6 months, at least one
month of active symptoms and at most 5 months of negative and attenuated
positive symptoms (detailed prodromal and residual symptoms are no longer
specified). The DSM-IV criteria contain two positive symptoms (hallucinations and delusions) and one negative symptom group (affective flattening,
alogia, avolition). Finally, DSM-IV excludes schizophrenia in the presence of
manic or depressive moods that are substantially longer in duration than the
psychotic symptoms.

2.4 Similarities and dissimilarities between ICD-10,
DSM-Ill-R and DSM-IV
The main differences between ICD-10 and DSM-111-R in the classification of
schizophrenia are the duration criterion (one month for ICD-10 compared
with six months for DSM-111-R) and the greater weight given in the ICD-10 to
Schneiderian first-rank symptoms. Negative symptoms are emphasized more in
the ICD-10, because they are spelt out and can be used for the diagnosis of the
disorder if they are present in conjunction with thought disorder (e.g. irrelevant

Schizophrenia

speech). The greater importance given in ICD-10 to first-rank symptoms has
the effect of narrowing the diagnosis, while the shorter duration requirement,
the reliance on negative symptoms and the inclusion of simple schizophrenia
tend to increase the number of patients embraced by the category of schizophrenia.
The definition of schizoaffective disorder in ICD-10 differs from that in
DSM-111-R in that it adopts an essentially cross-sectional approach and
requires the simultaneous presence of psychotic and affective symptoms. There
are other notable differences with respect to the classification of other
schizophrenia-like disorders. As may be seen in Table 1, ICD-10 recognizes
nine subtypes of schizophrenia, including post-schizophrenic depression. For
five of the subtypes there is a direct correspondence between ICD-10, DSM111-R, and DSM-IV. For one of these, the ICD-10 has used a different term
("hebephrenic" as opposed to "disorganized" in the DSM-111-R and DSMIV). Two other subtypes included in ICD-10 are not in the DSM-111-R
classification (post-schizophrenic depression and simple schizophrenia), but
are present in DSM-IV. Finally, two ICD-10 categories ("other schizophrenia" and "schizophrenia, unspecified") are not included in either of the
American diagnostic systems.
A recent literature review analysed available evidence concerning the
validity of the current subtypes of schizophrenia (McGlashan & Fenton, 1991) .
There are few relevant studies, but the data support the validity of the
paranoid, hebephrenic, undifferentiated and residual subtypes. Catatonic
schizophrenia has been least studied, perhaps owing to the rarity of this subtype
in the developed world (McGlashan & Fenton, 1991). Because of the historical
prominence of simple schizophrenia and the growing importance of deficit
processes in schizophrenia, the authors of the review advocated the reintroduction of this subtype in DSM-IV (which has, in fact, taken place).
As regards DSM-IV, positive and negative symptoms are presented in a
more generic and less detailed fashion than in either DSM-111-R or ICD-10,
but cover the same phenomenological territory. Negative symptoms have
received greater prominence in DSM-IV than in DSM-111-R. DSM-TV retains
the special significance of bizarre delusions and Schneiderian hallucinations,
which have been part of both DSM-111-R and ICD-10. Deterioration of
functioning continues to be a criterion in DSM-IV as in DSM-111-R, unlike
ICD-10 which has no corresponding requirement.
One study has compared the reliability and ease of use of ICD-10 (clinical
and research versions) and DSM-111-R among a small sample of psychiatrists
working in pairs to diagnose 60 patients (Mellsop et al., 1991).All three systems
showed similar, high inter-rater and inter-system agreement for the general
diagnostic categories of schizophrenia but not for subtypes, such as paranoid or
hebephrenic schizophrenia. The compatibility between ICD- 10 and DSM-IIIR for schizophrenia was much closer than that between ICD-8 and DSM-111.
It is likely, therefore, that the findings of epidemiological studies carried out
using the latest diagnostic systems will be more comparable than those resulting
from the earlier ones.

2. Diagnostic issues

Copeland et al. (1991) caution that standardized diagnostic criteria are
useless if investigators use them in an incomplete or variable manner. Accordingly, diagnostic criteria need to be accompanied by standardized instruments
and algorithms for their consistent implementation, iffull benefit is to be gained
from them.

2.5 Assessment methods
As described above, there has been a movement, over the years, towards
establishing and testing specific operational criteria for the diagnosis of
schizophrenia. This has made it possible to reduce one of the two main sources
of variability among diagnosticians, namely criterion variance. This term applies
to differences in the formal, but unstated, inclusion and exclusion criteria that
clinicians use in categorizing patient data to make psychiatric diagnoses. It is
evident, however, that the development ofspecific criteria for making diagnoses
does not ensure that clinicians will elicit and evaluate information in a uniform
manner. This problem leads to the second main form of diagnostic variability,
namely information variance. In order to reduce information variance, detailed
interview schedules have been developed. Among the first of these were the
Present State Examination (PSE) based on the ICD-8 criteria (Wing et al.,
1974), the Renard Diagnostic Interview (Helzer et al., 1981) based on
Feighner criteria, and the Schedule for Affective Disorders and Schizophrenia
(SADS) (Spitzer & Endicott, 1978) based on the RDC.
Recent developments in this area include the Diagnostic Interview Schedule (DIS), the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-III-R (SCID), the
Composite International Diagnostic Interview (CIDI), the Schedules for
Clinical Assessment in Neuropsychiatry (SCAN), and the Royal Park Multidiagnostic Instrument for Psychosis (McGorry et al., 1990). These instruments
will be reviewed briefly.
The DIS (Robins et al., 1981) was originally developed for the Epidemiologic Catchment Area (ECA) study. The instrument, which covers 43
DSM-I11 categories, is a highly structured interview, with every question
written out in full to be read verbatim to the respondent. It can be used by
either lay examiners or clinicians, and provides for an assessment of the lifetime
history of psychiatric disturbance, including the age at each positive diagnosis,
the age at most recent difficulty, and the duration of the longest episode. As
pointed out in section 3.1.1, the validity of the DIS in schizophrenia in
community studies is weak (Anthony et al., 1985; Helzer et al., 1985).Many of
those identified by the DIS as schizophrenic do not, in fact, suffer from the
illness but are people with relatively good functioning who report (and perhaps
exaggerate) private bizarre experiences. It is also questionable whether an
interview such as the DIS can successfully identify those who suffer from an
illness of which an important feature is lack of insight. The DIS fails, not so
much in the reporting of hallucinations and delusions, but more in the
reporting of associated deterioration in functioning, and in observation of

Schizophrenia

behaviour (Eaton et al., 1991). The DIS now includes DSM-111-R criteria, as
well as symptom onset and recency: this change, while improving the general
utility of the instrument, does little to alleviate its flaws for use in epidemiological studies of schizophrenia.
Another assessment instrument based on DSM-111 is the SCID (Spitzer &
Williams, 1985). The SCID differs from the DIS in that it is a semi-structured
interview; thus, examiners need considerable clinical experience and some
familiarity with DSM-I11 in order to use the instrument correctly. In consequence, the SCID is more appropriate than the DIS for the detection of serious
disorders such as schizophrenia, which requires some direct observation. In
addition, the SCID uses summary and screening questions, which allow the
interviewer to skip irrelevant sections of the instrument.
The CIDI and the SCAN were devised recently in the framework of a large
international collaborative project (Pull & Wittchen, 1991; Robins et al., 1988;
Wing et al., 1990). These two instruments have different aims: the CIDI is
intended primarily for surveys in the general population while the SCAN is
meant for studies of clinical samples. The CIDI is a clear, highly structured,
easily used interview schedule; it is based on the DIS, and has adopted certain
features of the PSE-9. It can be administered by non-clinicians as well as by
clinicians. The interview questions are fully spelt out and "closed ended" (i.e.
answerable by a number or by choosing among predetermined alternatives);
the answers do not need to be interpreted by the interviewer. CIDI is divided
into 15 sections, of which one is for schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders.
It allows diagnoses on a lifetime as well as on a cross-sectional basis. The
average duration of the interview with respondents from the general population is about 75 minutes; with psychiatric patients it takes considerably longer.
The core version of the CIDI is currently available in 16 languages.
Field trials with the CIDI have been conducted in 18 centres around the
world to test the feasibility and reliability of the instrument in different cultures
and settings as well as to test the inter-rater agreement for the different
questions. A total of 557 subjects were interviewed in a variety of settings
ranging from specialized psychiatric inpatient and outpatient units to general
practice settings, and were rated by an interviewer and an observer (Wittchen
et al., 1991). The kappa values for inter-rater reliability between centres were
excellent for schizophrenia (0.91).
The SCAN is a network of instruments designed with the aim of developing
a comprehensive procedure for clinical examination that is capable of classifying subjects according to categories of ICD-l0 and DSM-111-R. Basically,
SCAN is a continuation of the PSE tradition: it includes as a core component
the PSE-10, and all the components of the interview are processed by a
computer program, CATEGO 5. The instrument structures the clinical
examination and provides ratings of each symptom and sign; although it is
substantially structured, it retains the features of a clinical interview. It can be
used in its full form only by professionals experienced in diagnostic assessment:
the interviewer should have an understanding of basic psychopathology in
terms of phenomenology, and should know how to conduct a clinical interview

2. Diagnostic issues

using probes to cross-examine for the presence of defined symptoms. The
instrument is subdivided into two parts: part I is concerned with neurotic
symptoms and eating and substance abuse disorders, together with a screen for
part 11; part I1 covers psychotic and cognitive disorders, and abnormalities of
behaviour, affect and speech. The time span covered by the diagnostic
assessment can vary, although the major focus of attention is functioning in the
past month. The administration of the full SCAN usually takes about two
hours. As with previous editions of the PSE, the severity of individual symptoms
is rated and this can be used to generate the so-called "index of definition" i.e.
the likelihood that the clinical picture is severe enough for the subject to be
considered as suffering from a disorder. The core instruments of SCAN are
currently available in 16 languages.
The Royal Park Multidiagnostic Instrument for Psychosis is a validityoriented procedure recently developed for the assessment of acute psychotic
episodes. It uses serial information and multiple information sources to
construct a database of clinical information (McGorry et al., 1990). A number
of sets of operational criteria, including 11 definitions of schizophrenia and
several concepts of atypical, schizoaffective and affective psychoses, are
simultaneously applied to this database to produce a diagnostic profile for each
patient that can be linked to other variables.
The introduction of these standardized assessment methods for the diagnosis of schizophrenia represents a major step forward in epidemiological
research and is expected to lead to a higher rate of reliability in the assessment
process.

2.6 Case-finding methods
Four principal methods of case-finding may be used in epidemiological
research on schizophrenia.
One method is the community survey, in which every accessible member of
a community, or a selected sample of respondents from that community, is
interviewed. This approach has proved feasible for small communities in
geographically limited areas, but for large populations some sort of stratified or
random sampling is required. In fact, given the low occurrence rate of
schizophrenia, its epidemiological study requires very large population samples
in order to detect a sufficient number of cases.
Another approach uses a psychiatric case register of patients and their
contacts with treatment services. It was thought, until recently, that almost all
patients suffering from a schizophrenic disorder in the developed world would
sooner or later come to clinical attention and therefore be recorded in a local
case register. Recent studies have cast doubt on this assumption, which may
have become less valid in recent years as the community treatment of mental
illness has become more common. This case-finding approach clearly depends
on a well-functioning case register-an expensive mechanism which is available in few communities.

Schizophrenia

A third strategy relies on the identification of selected key informants,
known in the community for having wide social contacts and an intimate
knowledge of the culture. This approach has been applied in several epidemiological studies in the developing world, but has limitations in the complex
and more anonymous setting of industrial societies.
A fourth approach relies on information available at various treatment
facilities, including psychiatric hospitals, community mental health centres,
general hospitals, general practitioners' clinics etc. The main limitations of this
approach are (a) the under-representation of people with the disorder who do
not have contact with treatment centres, and (b) a skewed reporting of cases
with clinical or sociodemographic characteristics that are not representative of
all the persons with the disorder in the community.
Any case-finding approach has its strengths and limitations. A comprehensive strategy for epidemiological research may require a combination of
different approaches.

Epidemiology of schizophrenia

3.1 Incidence studies
Some authors, including Torrey (1980), have argued that the rate of occurrence of schizophrenia is very different in different settings; others, such as Leff
(1988), argue that it is remarkably similar in frequency. The discrepancy in
opinion is traceable, in large part, to methodological problems in the estimation of rates of incidence and prevalence of the disorder. Prevalence data are a
reflection not only of the occurrence of a condition but also of its duration
(which is affected by life expectancy). This can be expressed by Kramer's
( 1957) formula:
prevalence (P) = incidence ( I ) X duration (D).
In addition, we need to take into account that migration is an additional and
important variable affecting the relationship between prevalence and incidence. Whereas prevalence statistics are of some value in planning the
delivery of services, incidence rates are a more precise indicator of the
occurrence of an illness and are more useful in the development of etiological
theories.
In determining the incidence rate, the best way to obtain an accurate count
of cases is to conduct a door-to-door survey, and for skilled clinicians to
interview suspected cases in order to arrive at a diagnosis according to
standardized criteria and to determine the date of onset of the condition. As
mentioned earlier, in the case of illnesses with a low frequency of occurrence,
such as schizophrenia, the population that would have to be surveyed to
determine the incidence rate is so large that a door-to-door survey is impractical. Incidence data are generally derived, therefore, by counting the new cases
seen at treatment facilities within a population over a given period of time
(treated incidence rate). The accuracy of this approach depends on how many
cases enter treatment and how many treatment facilities and practitioners are
included in the case-finding process. Ideally, private practitioners and psychiatric wards of general hospitals should be included, but in many studies
these sources are not surveyed. Inadequacies of case-finding are a major source
of bias and contribute to the observed variation in incidence rates for
schizophrenia.
Another source of variation in reported rates is the wide range of diagnostic
approaches used by practitioners in different parts of the world and at different
times. In order to reduce this source of confusion, the incidence data in the

Schizophrenia

studies listed in Table 2 have been categorized as "narrow" (meaning the core
schizophrenic syndrome defined by the CATEGO S category), "standard"
(the usual clinical approach used throughout much of the world), and "broad"
(the diagnostic approach used in the USA before the introduction of DSM-I11
in 1980 and which included most cases categorized elsewhere as mania or
psychotic depression) (Cooper et al., 1972). Even within the standard category,
there is a wide range of diagnostic approaches: some of these studies restrict the
diagnosis to category 295 in ICD-9 (schizophrenic psychoses); others include
disorders in category 297 (paranoid states) and some disorders in category 298
(nonorganic psychoses). The Scandinavian concept of schizophrenia tends to
be restrictive and the Soviet concept broad, but both are included here in the
"standard" diagnostic category.
The effect of diagnosis on the observed incidence rate is evident in the study
by Ni Nualliin and co-workers (1987) in Ireland, in which use of the ICD
diagnosis resulted in an incidence rate (0.37 per 1000) twice as great as that
detected by the CATEGO S category (0.17 per 1000).Similarly, in a survey
by Giel et al. (1980) in the Netherlands, the incidence rate for schizophrenia
(ICD category 295) (0.03 per 1000) was one-quarter of the rate when paranoid
states (ICD category 297) and reactive and psychogenic psychoses (ICD
categories 298.4 and 298.8) were included (0.11 per 1000).
An additional reason for variation in reported incidence rates is the
difference in the proportion of the population that has reached the age of risk
for schizophrenia. Developing countries, for example, tend to have a higher
proportion of children in the population and, therefore, a smaller at-risk group.
Many studies calculate incidence as the rate of occurrence in the at-risk age
group. These age-corrected rates will be greater than those that are not
corrected for age: the two rates are not comparable and are listed separately in
Table 2.
Special factors, which will be discussed below, may explain the exceptionally high incidence figures emerging from the recent United States
Epidemiologic Catchment Area (ECA) survey (Tien & Eaton, 1992) and
presented in Table 2. Apart from this study the variation in the rates in Table 2
is relatively slight. The mean age-corrected incidence for schizophrenia,
excluding very narrow and very broad diagnostic approaches and excluding
the ECA data, is 0.24 per 1000, with a range of0.07 to 0.52 per 1000 (standard
deviation (SD) 0.1 1). The studies from which this mean is derived used a
variety of age ranges, which increases the variation in incidence rates. The
mean incidence of schizophrenia using the standard diagnostic approaches,
without correction for age, is 0.21 per l000 (range 0.05-0.56) (SD 0.14). When
the diagnosis is limited to the restrictive CATEGO S "core" schizophrenic
syndrome and corrected for age, the range of incidence is narrower (0.07-0.17
per 1000; mean 0.1 1; SD 0.03). With age correction and narrow diagnostic
criteria, therefore, there is little variation in the reported incidence of schizophrenia.

+

+

+

3. Epidemiology of schizophrenia

3.1.1 The NlMH Epidemiologic Catchment Area study
An unusually high incidence of schizophrenia and a high degree of variability
were determined by the Epidemiologic Catchment Area (ECA) study, a recent
prospective field survey of five communities in the United States, conducted by
the National Institute of Mental Health. Analysing data collected on two
occasions a year apart by trained non-clinician interviewers using the Diagnostic Interview Schedule (DIS) (see section 2.5), Tien & Eaton (1992) found
an annual age-corrected incidence rate of schizophrenia of between 1.0 and 7.1
per 1000. These rates are up to 25 times higher than the mean incidence rates
found in other studies using a standard diagnostic approach. Even without the
data from Baltimore (the site with the highest rate), the combined annual
incidence for the other four sites is 1.1 cases per 1000, which is higher than any
previously determined figure.
The authors offer two possible explanations for the unusually high rates in
the ECA study. A prospective community-based survey, they suggest, is able to
detect people who have not been in touch with help agencies and would not be
detected in clinically based studies. Previous ECA data have indicated that
about half of the active cases of schizophrenia are not currently receiving
treatment, but to remain undetected by a clinically based incidence study a
case must never come in contact with the agencies in the survey. This
explanation, therefore, accounts for less than a doubling of the observed
incidence rate. In two other studies, moreover-the Lundby study (Hagnell et
al., 1990) and a survey carried out in Madras by Rajkumar et al. (quoted by
Eaton, 1991)-cases were detected irrespective of whether the individual had
been in treatment or not, and yet the rates (0.24 and 0.58 per l000 respectively)
were substantially lower than those found in the ECA study.
The authors also suggest that the high incidence rate may be due to a high
number of false-positive cases being detected during the second interview at the
end of the one-year study period. The use of non-clinicians as interviewers
could have led to a substantial number of false-positives or false-negatives.
When compared with evaluation by psychiatrists using the Present State
Examination, the DIS is more likely to produce false-negatives than falsepositives (Tien & Eaton, 1992). In the detection of relatively rare illnesses such
as schizophrenia, however, a bias in the assessment of cases will result in many
more non-cases being rated as positive (since there are so many more non-cases)
than true cases being rated as negative.
A very high, divergent incidence figure was reported in the ECA survey for
Baltimore. When a subsample of 810 of the Baltimore subjects was submitted
to clinical evaluation by psychiatrists (Anthony et al., 1985), high falsenegative and false-positive rates were revealed. Only 16% of the cases diagnosed as schizophrenia by lay interviewers using the DIS were confirmed as
schizophrenia by the psychiatrists; and only 21% of the cases diagnosed as
schizophrenic by the psychiatrists were detected by the DIS interview. In one
case, the DIS interviewer wrote marginal notes about a subject's bizarre
behaviour, but there was no DIS coding item for the notes. In another instance,

Schizophrenia
Table 2
Incidence of schizophrenia
Authors

Country
or area

Population

Sample

Casefinding
method

Diagnostic
assessment

Norway

Entire country

All first admissions,
1926-35
(n = 14231)

Hospital
diagnosis

Shepherd
(1957)

UK

Buckinghamshire First admis(n = 271 586 in
sions,
1931)
1931-33
1945-47
(n = 364 257 in
1947)

Hospital
diagnosis

Hollingshead
& Redlich
(1958)

USA

New Haven, CT
(n = 174000)

All individuals in
treatment, 6
month period

Census of
hospitals,
clinics,
practitioners

Norris (1959)

UK

Catchment area
( n = 1661 000)

All admissions,
1947-49

Record
tracing,
2-year follow'JP

Jaco (1960)

USA

State of Texas
(n = 7.7 million)

All first
admissions,
1951-52
(n = 2701)

Hospital,
clinic &
practitioner
records

Pollack et al.
(1964)

USA

LA,
MD

First admissions,
1960-61

Census
Hospital
matching of
diagnosis
patients from
public, private
mental hospitals,
veterans
administrations,
general
hospitals

Dunham
(1965)

USA

Two districts of
Detroit
(n = 118 577)

All first
admissions,
1958

Screening of
all
psychiatric
facilities

Warthen et al.
(1967)

USA

MD

First
admissions.
1963

Case register, Facility
all facilities
diagnosis
except private
outpatient
practice

Facility
diagnosis &
study
rediagnosis

Facility
diagnosis

3. Epidemiology of schizophrenia

Incidence per 1000 population per year
Age
group
for
calculation
of rate
(years)

Narrow diagnosis

Without
age
correction

Standard diagnosis

With
Without
age
age
correction correction

Broad diagnosis

With
Without
age
age
correction correction

With
age
correction

Table 2 (cont.)
Authors

Country
or area

Population

Sample

Casefinding
method

Adelstein et al. UK
(1968)

Salford
( n = 150000)

All contacts
in inception
episodes

Case register Hospital
diagnosis
(ICD 295)

Walsh (1969)

Ireland

Dublin
(n = 720000)

All first
admissions
( n = 1427)

Hospital
diagnosis

Hafner &
Reimann
(1970)

Fed. Rep.
of Germany

Mannheim
(n = 328 106)

First contacts, 1965

Hailey et al.
(1974)

UK

Camberwell

ICD 295

Hailey et al.
(1974)

UK

Salford

ICD 295

Liebermann
(1974)

USSR

Moscow
( n = 248 000)

All onsets,
1910-64

Dispensary
register

Records,
personal
examination

Bland et al.

Canada

State of Alberta
(n = 662 181)

All first
admissions,
1963

Provincial
hospital
records

DSM-Ill &
ICD-8
diagnoses

Nielsen
(1976)

Denmark

Samso Island
(n = 6823)

All service
contacts,
1964

General
practitioners'
case
register

Facility
diagnosis

Helgason
(1977)

Iceland

Entire country

All first
treatment
contacts,
1966-67

National
case
register &
hospital &
disability
records

Krasik &
Semin (1980)

USSR

Tomsk

First admissions,
1948-51
1959-61
1969-7 1

District
mental
hos~ital

Case register, state &
private
hospitals,
practitioners,
welfare &
help
agencies

Diagnostic
assessment

Facility
diagnosis (ICD
295, 297, 298.3,
298.4)

Facility
diagnosis

Schizophrenia
Table 2 (cont.)
Authors

Country
or area

Population

Sample

Casefinding
method

Babigian
(1980)

USA

Monroe County,
NY

First contacts, 1970

Case regisFacility
ter, hospitals, diagnosis
clinics &
practitioners

Giel et al.
(1980)

Netherlands

Groningen &
Drenthe

First contacts, 1975

Case register

ICD-8 (295,
297, 298.4,
298.8, 298.9)

Shen
(1981)

China

Haidan district,
Beijing
(n = 156 200)

All onsets,
1974-77

Screening
of village
population
by "barefoot
doctors"

Psychiatrists'
diagnosis

Krupinskl
(1983)

Australia

Victoria

First contacts, 1980

Bates B van
Dam (1984)

Canada

Vancouver
Island,
coastal Indians

First admissions,
1975-83

Case register Hospital
diagnosis

Scotland

First admissions,
1969
1978

Health
service
register

Eagles &
Whalley (1985)

Diagnostic
assessment

Hospital
diagnosis
ICD-8 (295)

MunkJsrgensen
(1986)

Denmark

Entire country

First admissions,
1970
1984

Case register Facility
diagnosis

Ni Nuallaln
et al. (1987)

Ireland

Rosscommon,
Carlow,
Westmeath
(n = 150 000)

First contacts,
1974-77

Case
Clinical or
register,
research
psychiatric
diagnosis
services,
CATEGO/
Inpatient and ICD-9
outpatient
(295,297)
Research
diagnosis
CATEGO S

KaliEanin
(1987)

Yugoslavla

Belgrade

Dilling et al.
(1989)

Fed. Rep.
of Germany

Upper Bavaria
(n = 424 000)

First contacts, 1971

Case register, hospital,
clinic
& office
practice

Facility
diagnosis

+

3. Epidemiology of schizophrenia

Incidence per 1000 population per year
Age
group
for
calculation
of rate
(years)

Narrow diagnosis

Without
age
correction

Standard diagnosis

With
Without
age
age
correction correction

Broad diagnosis

With
Without
age
age
correction correction

With
age
correction

Schizophrenia
Table 2 (cont.)
Authors

Country
or area

Population

Sample

Casefinding
method

Folnegovik
et al.
(1990)

Yugoslavia

Croatia

First admissions,
1965-84

Case register ICD-7, ICD-8,
ICD-9

Der et al
(1990)

UK

England

First admissions,
1970
1986

Health service Hospital
register
diagnosis:
schizophrenia,
paranoia,
schizoaffective
disorder

Hagnell
et al.
(1990)

Sweden

Lundby

General
population
survey

Rajkumar
et al. (1991)

India

Madras

General
population
survey

Salford
(n = 91 552)

All first
contacts,
1984

Case register, general
practitioners

ICD-9
(295, 297)

Bamrah
et al. (1991)

Diagnostic
assessment

Hafner &
Gattaz (1991)

Fed. Rep.
of Germany

Mannheim
(n = 300 000)

First contacts,
1985

Case
register,
state &
private
hospitals,
practitioners,
help
agencies

Facility
diagnosis (ICD
295, 297, 298.3,
298.4)

Hafner &
Gattaz (1991)

Fed. Rep.
of Germany

Rhine-Neckar
district
(n = 1488 205)

First admissions,
1989-90

10 hospitals

CATEGO S $

Hafner (1991)

Fed. Rep.
of Germany

Rhine-Neckar
district
(n = 1 488 205)

First admissions,
1987-89
( n = 392)

10 hospitals

ICD (295,297,
298.3, 298.4)

Jablensky
et al. (1992)

Denmark

Aarhus

First contacts,
1978-80

All help
agencies

CATEGO S $
CATEGO
S,P,O or
clinical
diagnosis

3. Epidemiology of schizophrenia

Incidence per 1000 population per year
Age
group
for
calculation
of rate
(years)

Narrow diagnosis

Without
age
correction

Standard diagnosis

With
Without
age
age
correction correction

Broad diagnosis

With
Without
age
age
correction correction

With
age
correction

Schizophrenia

Table 2 (cont.)
Authors

Country
or area

Population

Sample

Casefinding
method

Diagnostic
assessment

Jablensky
et al. (1992)

India

Chandigarh
(rural)

First contacts,
1978-80

All help
agencies

CATEGO S
CATEGO
S,P,O or
clinical
diagnosis

Jablensky
et al. (1992)

India

Chandigarh
(urban)

First contacts,
1978-80

All help
agencies

CATEGO S
CATEGO
S,P,O or
clinical
diagnosis

Jablensky
et al. (1992)

Ireland

Dublin

First contacts,
1978-80

All help
agencies

CATEGO S
CATEGO
S,P,O or
clinical
diagnosis

Jablensky
et al. (1992)

USA

Honolulu.
Hawaii

First contacts,
1978-80

All help
agencies

CATEGO S
CATEGO
S,P,O or
clinical
diagnosis

Jablensky
et al. (1992)

USSR

Moscow

First contacts,
1978-81

All help
agencies

CATEGO S
CATEGO
S,P,O or
clinical
diagnosis

Jablensky
et al. (1992)

Japan

Nagasaki

First contacts,
1978-80

All help
agencies

CATEGO S
CATEGO
S,P,O or
clinical
diagnosis

Jablensky
et al. (1992)

UK

Nottingham

First contacts,
1978-80

All help
agencies

CATEGO S
CATEGO
S,P,O or
clinical
diagnosis

Tien & Eaton
(1992)

USA

New Haven, CT

Representative
sample of
general
population

Census
survey,
two waves

DISIDSM-Ill,
non-clinician
interviewers

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

Schizophrenia
Table 2 (cont.)
Authors

Country
or area

Population

Sample

Casefinding
method

Diagnostic
assessment

Tien & Eaton
(1992)

USA

Baltimore, MD

Representative
sample of
general
population

Census
survey,
two waves

DIS/DSM-Ill,
non-clinician
interviewers

Tien & Eaton
(1992)

USA

St Louis,
MO

Representative
sample of
general
population

Census
survey,
two waves

DISIDSM-Ill,
non-clinician
interviewers

Tien & Eaton
(1992)

USA

Durham, NC

Representative
sample of
general
population

Census
survey,
two waves

DISIDSM-Ill,
non-clinician
interviewers

Tien & Eaton
(1992)

USA

Los Angeles,
CA

Representative
sample of
general
population

Census
survey,
two waves

DISIDSM-Ill,
non-clinician
interviewers

a DIS interviewer skipped over a series of questions relating to schizophrenia
because the subject responded to the first question in the section in a
threatening manner. Patients who were coded as schizophrenic by the DIS
were often diagnosed as suffering from some other mental disorder, such as
bipolar disorder or histrionic personality, by the clinical interview.
The central problem in interpreting the unusual results from the ECA study
is the extent to which the findings are the result of biases produced by the use of
lay interviewers and a symptom questionnaire instead of face-to-face psychiatric evaluation.

3.1.2 The WHO Study on the Determinants of the Outcome of
Severe Mental Disorders
The clearest indication of limited variability in the incidence of schizophrenia is
the evidence from the WHO ten-country study of the incidence and course of

3. Epiderniolo.gy o f schizophrenia

Incidence per 1000 population per year
Age
group
for
calculation
of rate
(years)

Narrow diagnosis

Without
age
correction

Standard diagnosis

With
Without
age
age
correction correction

Broad diagnosis

With
Without
age
age
correction correction

With
age
correction

schizophrenia (Jablensky et al., 1992). This multicentre study applied standardized diagnostic criteria and used a thorough case-finding procedure which
attempted to ensure that all people suffering from the disorder were included.
The study set out to identify all those aged 15-54 who had either experienced a
psychotic symptom or demonstrated psychotic behaviour during the previous
year and who had made contact with a "helping agency" for psychiatric
reasons for the first time in their lives. The help-givers included psychiatric and
medical facilities, traditional healers, priests and other religious figures.
The study detected very little variation in the incidence of the illness
between sites (see Fig. 1). The range for the most restrictive diagnostic category
(CATEGO S + ) was from 0.07 per 1000 in Aarhus, Denmark, to 0.14 in
Nottingham, United Kingdom (mean 0.10 per 1000; SD 0.02). The broader
diagnostic approach (a clinical diagnosis of schizophrenia or CATEGO S,P,O)
produced a range of incidence values from 0.16 per 1000 in Honolulu, Hawaii,
to 0.42 per 1000 in a rural area near Chandigarh, India: the mean was 0.25 per
l000 (SD = 0.09).

Schizophrenia
Fig. 1
Annual incidence of schizophrenia per 100000 population aged 15-54 (both
sexes) for the broad and restrictive definitions
Aarhus
Chandigarh
(rural)
Chandigarh
(urban)
Dublin

Honolulu

Moscow

Nagasak~

Nott~ngharn
0

B

10

20

m Broad definition

m

:

30

40

gz

50

Restrictive def~nition

3.1.3 Incidence in developing countries
The symptom profiles of schizophrenic subjects in developed and developing
countries are similar, with the following exceptions. Affective symptoms,
especially depression, are more common among patients in developed countries. Some Schneiderian first-rank symptoms, such as thought insertion and
thought broadcasting, occur more frequently in patients in developed countries
while others, such as delusions of control, are more common in patients in
developing countries. Auditory hallucinations and, particularly, visual hallucinations are more prevalent in the developing world. The two groups of
patients are equally likely to experience the various kinds of delusions.
Torrey (1980)has argued, using prevalence data, that schizophrenia occurs
less frequently in the developing world than in the developed world. The WHO
ten-country study is of particular interest, therefore, in furnishing data on the
incidence of schizophrenia in the Third World. These data reveal that the
incidence of schizophrenia in Chandigarh, India, and in the rural area around
the city is very similar to rates found in the developed world, when the
diagnostic standard is applied. Using a broader
restrictive CATEGO S
diagnostic approach, the rates in and around Chandigarh are above the mean
for the centres in the developed world. Another study gave an incidence figure

+

3. Epidemology of schizophrenia

for the Haidan district of China of 0.1 1 per 1000 (Shen Yucun et al., 1981)
which is below the mean for developed countries, but well within one standard
deviation. A study from Madras, India (Rajkumar et al., 1991), detected a
relatively high age-corrected incidence rate of 0.58 per 1000. Given the
similarity in incidence figures for developed and developing countries, we must
conclude that the low prevalence estimates for schizophrenia in the Third
World (see section 3.2) are a consequence of higher recovery rates in the
developing countries, which have been well documented (WHO, 1979;
Warner, 1983; Jablensky et al., 1992), and, perhaps, of higher death rates
among people suffering from psychosis.

3.1.4 Pockets of high incidence
Pockets of high levels of occurrence of schizophrenia have been reported in
different parts of the world. Some of these reports, for example from the Istrian
peninsula of Yugoslavia (Crocetti et al., 1971) and from a district of Sweden
inside the Arctic Circle (Book, 1953; Book et al., 1978), rely upon prevalence
estimates and may, therefore, be influenced by migration, recovery and death
rates.
Unusually high incidence figures have been reported, none the less, for
parts of Ireland. First admission rates for schizophrenia to Irish hospitals have
been reported to be 2-3 times greater than those to hospitals in England and
Wales (Walsh & Walsh, 1970). A recent report (Ni Nualliin et al., 1987),
however, suggests that these "first admission" rates are somewhat exaggerated
because many Irish hospitals interpreted "first admission" as first admission to
that hospital, even though the patient may have been previously admitted
elsewhere. A more rigorous investigation using standardized case-finding
procedures and diagnostic guidelines (Ni Nualliin et al., 1987) has determined
the incidence rate in three Irish counties with diverse characteristics to be
above the mean, but not dramatically so. In this study, the age-corrected
incidence of "core" schizophrenia (CATEGO S + ) was 0.17 per 1000,
compared with a mean of 0.11 for studies worldwide. The rate for a standard
definition of schizophrenia (ICD 295, 297) was 0.37, which is within qne
standard deviation of the worldwide mean of 0.26. In the WHO ten-country
study the incidence of schizophrenia in Dublin (CATEGO S ,O. 12; standard
diagnosis, 0.24) was very close to the worldwide mean. A recent review of
epidemiological studies suggests that Ireland should not be considered to have a
high incidence of schizophrenia without more reliable research (Cabot, 1990).
In Ireland, as elsewhere, the apparent variability in the frequency of occurrence of schizophrenia diminishes as the research methodology becomes more
standardized.
High incidence figures have also been reported for parts of Germany.
Hafner & Reimann (1970) reported a rate of 0.54 per 1000 (not age-corrected)
in Mannheim, and Hafner & Gattaz (1991) reported a rate of 0.56 per l000 for
the same city at a later date. Dilling & Weyerer (1980) similarly reported a rate

+

Schizophrenia

of 0.48 per 1000 in upper Bavaria. Each of these studies based the incidence rate
upon a case register and the diagnosis of the treating facility, which may have
been unusually broad. This explanation is supported by the finding of Hafner
& Gattaz (1991) that the incidence of narrowly defined (CATEGO S )
schizophrenia in the same region of Germany, at 0.09 per 1000, was not above
the worldwide mean.
Somewhat elevated incidence figures have also been reported for India.
Rajkumar et al. (1991) found an age-corrected rate of 0.58 per 1000 in Madras
and, as mentioned above, higher than average rates were found in the WHO
study in Chandigarh city and in the surrounding rural area (0.35 and 0.42 per
1000, age-corrected). The incidence rate found using the narrow definition
(CATEGO S +), however, was not elevated in and around Chandigarh.

+

3.1.5 Differences in age of onset for males and females
A common finding of incidence studies of schizophrenia, and one which was
noted by Kraepelin in 1909, is that the onset of the disorder is earlier in males
than in females. Earlier onset of schizophrenia in men, as assessed on the basis of
the first hospitalization, was found in five out of seven centres included in the
WHO Collaborative Study on Assessment and Reduction of Psychiatric
Disability (Hambrecht et al., 1992). In a review of more than 50 studies,
Angermayer & Kuhn (1988) found age differences ranging from one to ten
years between men and women at first admission. The difference is apparent
regardless of the definition of onset used: whether the date of first hospital
admission (the measure used by Kraepelin), for example, the occurrence of the
first symptoms of schizophrenia, or the occurrence of the first nonspecific signs
of a mental disorder or personality change.
A study conducted through the Danish National Psychiatric Case Register
and the Mannheim case register yielded useful information on sex differences in
age at first admission. Hospital admissions for schizophrenia and related
diagnoses and previous admissions for other diagnoses were compared for
cohorts of the Danish population and of inhabitants of Mannheim for specific
years (Hafner et al., 1989). The authors found that first admission to hospital
was 5-6 years earlier in men than in women in both countries when broad
diagnostic criteria were employed, and 4-5 years earlier when a restrictive
definition was applied. The finding was not attributable to diagnostic procedures or to sex differences in seeking help or occupational status. There was no
difference in age at first hospitalization, however, between single men and
women. This observation could indicate either a protective effect of marriage
on women's vulnerability to schizophrenia or a reduction in marriage rates in
women who have an earlier onset of the disorder. Riecher-Rossler et al. (1992),
re-analysing the German data, concluded that there was no evidence to support
the first hypothesis.
In a two-year study in Germany Hafner et al. (1992) found that the earliest
signs of mental disturbance occurred four and a half years prior to first

3. Epidemology of schizophrenia
Table 3
Mean age at different points in the development of schizophrenia for men and
women, Germany
Age (years)

Earliest sign of mental disturbance
First sch~zophrenicsymptom
Beginning of "Index" episode
Admission for "Index" episode

Men

Women

24.3
26.5
27.8
28.5

27.5
30.6
31.7
32.4

admission, on average. The onset was significantly earlier in males than females
regardless of the operational definition of onset used. Table 3 shows the mean
age at different points in the development of the disorder for men and women.
Recently Faraone et al. (1994) demonstrated that the observed earlier onset of
illness in males is not due to demographic confounding.
In Hafner's sample, schizophrenia started with negative symptoms in 70%
of the cases, the earliest negative symptom appearing on average six years
before the first admission. Positive symptoms followed, appearing no earlier
than two years before the first admission. Core symptomatology at the
beginning of the psychosis and the progress of positive and negative symptoms
were similar in both sexes and all age groups studied.
Women have a lower rate of development of schizophrenia than males in
adolescence, but show a second peak in incidence after the menopause. Hafner
(1 99 1) argued that this pattern suggests a connection between the onset of the
disorder and estrogen secretion: estradiol may produce a neuroleptic-like effect
on dopamine secretion and on prolactin levels and thus may reduce the
vulnerability to schizophrenia. This hypothesis has been confirmed to some
extent by experimental studies (Hafner et al., 1991a, 1991b). The sex difference in
the age of onset, moreover, appears to be true in different countries, an observation
that supports a biological explanation, rather than a psychosocial one.
The overall incidence ofschizophrenia in men and women is similar in most
studies. Hafner (1991) found that the cumulative incidence up to age 60, an
indicator of the lifetime risk, was equal for females and males. This suggests that
whatever factors account for the sex differences in the disorder only serve to
delay the onset and do not prevent it. A few studies, nevertheless, have found a
significantly higher incidence of schizophrenia among males than among
females (Iacono & Beiser, 1992). In the WHO DOSMED study, when
paranoid and selected reactive states were excluded from the schizophrenia
spectrum, six of the eight sites reported an excess of males over females
(Jablensky et al., 1992). It is possible that gender bias may explain the underrepresentation ofwomen found in some studies (Hambrecht et al., 1992). In a
recent study designed to overcome previous methodological problems, no
significant differences in the incidence of schizophrenia in men and women
could be detected using a variety of diagnostic definitions (Hambrecht et al.,
1994).

The later onset in women may partially explain the observation that the
illness is less severe in women than in men. As early as 1845, the British
physician, John Thurnam (1845),noted that the proportion of asylum patients
discharged as recovered was consistently higher for females than males. A
century later, Odegaard (1960) found a higher early discharge rate for females
than males among schizophrenics leaving Norwegian hospitals between 1936
and 1945. Beck (1978) noted that outcome studies often demonstrate a worse
outcome for male schizophrenics, and never for females. In the WHO International Pilot Study of Schizophrenia, fewer women patients than men were in
the worst outcome group at follow-up and more women than men were in the
best outcome group.
The superior outcome for female schizophrenic patients may be due to
biological factors, such as the anti-dopaminergic effect of estrogen, decreased
cerebral laterality in women or lower rates of perinatal complications in female
infants (Seeman, 1982); social factors, such as reduced labour market stress
(Warner, 1985); or simply the later onset of illness in women (Lewine, 1981).
Later onset provides an opportunity for the development of a higher level of
premorbid social competence and is a predictor of good outcome in schizophrenia (Phillips, 1953; Stephens et al., 1966; Marder et al., 1979). Data from
four psychiatric case registers in Australia, Denmark, the United Kingdom and
the United States of America (Eaton et al., 1992b) suggest that sex differences
in the course of schizophrenia are explained by the earlier age of onset in men.
I n each of the four areas, early age of onset was associated with an increased risk
of readmission to hospital. When age of onset was taken into account, neither
sex nor marital status had significant effects on risk of rehospitalization.

3.2 Prevalence studies
3.2.1 Community studies
Studies of the prevalence of schizophrenia in the general population give an
impression of considerable variation. The same methodological problems that
contribute to the apparent variation in incidence statistics apply to prevalence
studies, and are amplified by differences in recovery rates, migration and death
rates. An additional source of variation is the period of time over which
prevalence is estimated. The number of cases at any one time is the point
prevalence; the number observed in a given period (often one year) is the period
prevalence; and the number in the population who have suffered from the illness
at any time in their lives is the lifetime prevalence. Lifetime prevalence is
unaffected by recovery rates but is influenced by the rate of migration and
death among affected persons.
The studies listed in Table 4 display a wide variation in prevalence rates,
even among those using roughly similar epidemiological approaches. In studies
measuring point prevalence or prevalence for a period of up to one year,

Table 4
Studies of the prevalence of schizophrenia
Authors

Country
or area

Population

Type of
studya

Age group
surveyed
(years)

Period

Prevalence per 1000
population
without age
correction

W
-4

Europe
Temkov et al. (1980)
FoLnegoviC & FolnegoviCSmalc (1992)
FoLnegoviC & FolnegoviCSmalc (1992)
Fo!negovic & FolnegoviCSmalc (1992)
Strljmgren (1938)
Fremming (1951)
Nielsen & Nielsen (1977)
Kaila (1942)
Vaisanen (1975)
Lehtinen et al. (1978)
Lehtinen et al. (1990a)
Lehtinen et al. (1990b)
Brugger (1931)
Brugger (1933)
Klemperer (1933)
Brugger (1938)
Dilling & Weyerer (1984)
Hetgason (1964)
Stefansson et al. (1991)
Walsh (1976)
Walsh et al. (1980)
Torrey et al. (1984)
Youssef et al. (1991)

Bulgaria
Croatia

urban
urban or rural

S.C.
census

point
3 months

Croatia

urban or rural

census

3 months

Croatia

urban or rural

census

3 months

Denmark
Denmark
Denmark
Finland
Finland
Finland
Finland
Finland
Germany
Germany
Germany
Germany
Germany, Fed. Rep. of
lceland
Iceland
lreland
lreland
lreland
lreland

rural & small town
rural & small town
rural
rural
rural
rural
urban & rural
urban & rural
rural
rural

census
b.c.
census
census
census
census
census
b.c.
census
census
b.c.
census
census
b.c.
census
S.C.
S.C.
census
census

lifetime
lifetime
lifetime
lifetime
point
point
point
point
lifetime
lifetime
point
lifetime
point
lifetime
lifetime
point
point
6 months
1 year

rural
rural
urban & rural
urban & rural
rural
rural
rural
rural

with age
correction

Table 4 (cont.)
Authors

Country
or area

Population

Type of
studya

Age group
surveyed
(years)

Period

Prevalence per 1000
population
without age
correction

Zimmerrnan-Tansella
et al. (1985)
Bremer (1951)
Fugelli (1975)
Vazquez-Barquero
et al. (1987)
Sjogren (1948), Larsson &
Sjogren (1954)
B6ok (1953)
Essen-Moller (1956)
Hagnell (1966)
Book et al. (1978)
Halldin (1984)
Widerlov et al. (1989)
Widerlov et al. (1989)
Mayer-Gross (1948)
Primrose (1962)
Wing et al. (1967)
Wing & Fryers (1976)
Freeman & Alpert (1986)
Mavreas & Bebbington (1987)
Bamrah et al. (1991)
Zharikov (1968)
Rotstein (1977)
Ouspenskaya (1978)
Crocetti et al. (1971)
Crocetti et al. (1971)
Kulcar et al. (1971)

Italy
Norway
Norway

urban
rural
rural

S.C.
census
census

Spain

rural

census

Sweden
Sweden
Sweden
Sweden
Sweden
Sweden
Sweden
Sweden
UK (Scotland)
UK (Scotland)
UK
UK
UK
UK
UK
USSR
USSR
USSR
Yugoslavia
Yugoslavia
Yugoslavia

rural
rural
rural
rural
rural
urban
urban
rural
rural
rural
urban
urban
urban
urban
urban
urban
several areas
various areas
urban
urban
rural

census
census
census
census
census
census
S.C.
S.C.

census
census
S.C.
S.C.
S.C.
census
S.C.

S.C.
census
S.C.

census
census
census

1 year
lifetime
2 years

45 years
48 years
lifetime
lifetime
77 years
1 year
lifetime
lifetime
lifetime
point
1 year
point
1 year
point
1 year
point
point
lifetime
3 months
3 months
3 months

with age
correction

North America
Leighton et al. (1963)
Murphy & Lernieux
(1967)
Murphy & Lemieux
(1967)
Murphy & Lemieux
(1967)
Murphy & Lernieux
(1967)
Murphy & Lernieux
(1967)
Murphy & Lernieux
(1967)
Bland et al. (1988)
Lernkau et al. (1942, 1943)
Roth & Luton (1943)
Hollingshead & Redlich
(1958)
Kramer (1978)
Weissman & Myers
(1980)
Myers et al. (1984)
Myers et al. (1984)
Myers et al. (1984)
Blazer et al. (1985)
Blazer et al. (1985)
Burnam et al. (1987)
Burnam et al. (1987)
Canino et al. (1987)
Babigian (1980)

Japan
Uchimura (1940)
Mukasa et al. (1941)
Hiratsuka & Nornura
(1941)
Tsugawa (1942)
Akimoto et al. (1943)
Ogino & Nagao (1943)

Canada
Canada

Canada

rural
"old French"
villages
"new French"
villages
"Anglo-Protestant"
villages
"Irish-Catholic"
villages
"Polish" villages

Canada

"German" villages

census

ooint

Canada
USA
USA
USA

urban
urban
rural
urban

census
census
census
census

lifetime
lifetime
lifetime
6 months

USA
USA

urban
urban

census
census

1 year
point

USA
USA
USA
USA
USA
USA
USA
Puerto Rico
USA

urban
urban
urban
rural
rural
urban
urban
urban and rural
urban

census
census
census
census
census
census
census
census
S.C.

6 months
6 months
6 months
6 months
6 months
6 months
6 months
6 months
1 year

Japan
Japan
Japan

rural
rural
rural

census
census
census

lifetime
lifetime
lifetime

Japan
Japan
Japan

urban
small town
rural

census
census
census

lifetime
lifetime
lifetime

Canada
Canada
Canada

census
census

point
point

census

point

census

ooint

census

point

census

point

Table 4 (cont.)
Authors

Country
or area

Population

Type of
studya

Age group
surveyed
(years)

Period

Prevalence per 1000
population
without age
with age
correction

$

Japanese Mlnlsrry of
Health & Welfare (1955)
Okabe (1957)
Arar et al (1958)
Arar et al (1958)
Aral et al (1958)
Aklmoto et al (1964)
Japanese Mln~stryof
Health & Welfare (1965)
Sato (1966)
Hrrayasu (1969)
Kato (1969)
Harukl (1972)
Shrbata et al (1975)
Shlbata et al (1978)

Japan

urban & rural

census

1 year

Japan
Japan
Japan
Japan
Japan
Japan

rural
rural
rural
rural
rural
urban & rural

census
census
census
census
census
census

lifetime
lifetime
lifetime
lifetime
lifetime
1 year

Japan
Japan
Japan
Japan
Japan
Japan

urban
rural
rural
rural
rural
rural

census
census
census
census
census
census

5 years
lifetime
lifetime
lifetime
lifetime
lifetime

Aborigines
Aborigines
Indians
non-Indians
Hutterites
Amish

census
census
census
census
census
census

point
point
point
point
lifetime
5 years

Botswana

rural

census

> 14

1 year

Chrna
Chrna
Chrna

rural & urban
rural & urban
rural

census
S.C.
census

-

point
point
1 year

Special populations in developed countries
Jones & Horne (1973)
Australra (western)
Eastwell (1975)
Australra (northern)
Roy et al (1970)
Canada
Roy et al (1970)
Canada
Eaton & Well (1955)
Canada
Egeland & Hostetter
USA
(1983)
Developing countries
Ben-Tovrm & Cushnre
(1986)
Lln et al (1981)
Shen Yucun et al (1981)
Cheung (1991)

P

P

correction

Cheung (1991)
Cheung (1991)
Cheung (1991)
Cheung (1991)
Lin (1953)
Rin & Lin (1962)
Lin et al. (1969)
Hwu et al. (1989)
Sikanerty & Eaton (1984)
Surya et al. (1964)
Sethi et al. (1967)
Elnagar et al. (1971)
Dube & Kumar (1972)
Sethi et al. (1972a)
Sethi et al. (1972b)
Verghese et al. (1973)
Sethi et al. (1974)
Nand1 et al. (1975)
Thacore et al. (1975)
Carstairs & Kapur (1976)
Murthy et al. (1978)
Nandi et al. (1980)
Lee et al. (1990a)
Lee et al. (1990b)
Jayasundera (1969)
Jayasundera (1969)
Jayasundera (1969)
Jayasundera (1969)
Wijesinghe et al. (1978)
Baasher (1961)
Murphy & Taumoepeau
(1980)
Murphy & Taumoepeau
(1980)

China
China
China
China
China (Province of
Taiwan)
China (Province of
Taiwan)
China (Province of
Taiwan)
China (Province of
Taiwan)
Ghana
lndia
lndia
lndia
lndia
lndia
lndia
lndia
lndia
lndia
lndia
lndia
lndia
lndia
Republic of Korea
Republic of Korea
Sri Lanka
Sri Lanka
Sri Lanka
Sri Lanka
Sri Lanka
Sudan
Tonga
Tonga

rural
12 regions
12 regions
rural
Chinese

census
census
census
census
census

1 year
l year
lifetime
1 year
lifetime

2.6
4.7
5.7
2.2
2.2

Aborigines

census

lifetime

0.9

Chinese

census

lifetime

1.4

Chinese

census

lifetime

rural
urban
urban
rural
urban & rural
urban
rural
urban
urban
rural
urban
rural
rural
rural
rural
urban
semi-rural
semi-rural
rural
traditional rural
semi-urban
village
rural

census
census
census
census
census
census
census
census
census
census
census
census
census
census
census
census
census
census
census
census
census
census
census

point
point
point
point
lifetime
point
point
point
point
point
point
point
point
point
lifetime
lifetime
point
point
point
point
6 months
point
1 year

0.6
1.5
2.3
4.3
2.2
2.4
1. l
1.7
2.5
2.8
1.9

rural

census

l year

0.7

'b.c = birth cohort study; census = census (including key ~nferrnant)study; S.C.= serlvce contact study.

7.0
2.2

3.2
2.3
5.2
1.3
3.7
7.0
0.4

Schizobhrenia

age-corrected rates range from a low of 0.9 per 1000 of the population in Tonga
to a high of 17.4 per 1000 in Ireland, with a mean of 5.8 per 1000 (SD 3.6).
This variation in prevalence has been remarked upon in a number of recent
reviews (Eaton, 1985; Eaton et al., 1988; Torrey, 1987). Torrey (1987) argued
that the data supported the possibility of a real tenfold difference in prevalence,
comparable to the prevalence range reported for rheumatoid arthritis. He also
pointed out that the north-south gradient in the distribution of schizophrenia
is similar to that reported for heart disease and multiple sclerosis.
A more restricted prevalence range was noted by Jablensky (1986) in his
review of 26 European epidemiological studies carried out among geographically defined populations: he found a point prevalence in the range
2.5-5.3 per 1000, and an individual morbidity risk between 0.36% and 1.87%.
As Jablensky (1988) pointed out, there is another syndrome with a
heterogeneous etiology and a similar pattern of distribution over geographical
areas and time, namely mental retardation. Hafner (1988) argued, similarly,
that vulnerability to schizophrenia may be distributed along a continuous
dimension in the population, as are low I Q values. Different disorders in the
schizophrenia spectrum, he suggested, are arranged along this dimension from
severe psychosis, through intermediate disorders, to mental health. A restrictive
definition of schizophrenia, such as CATEGO S , will capture a certain
proportion of the cases, just as a low cut-off score for IQwill capture a small
proportion of those considered mentally retarded. Broader diagnostic criteria
will capture a larger section of the people with disorders in the schizophrenia
spectrum.

+

3.2.2 Prevalence in developing countries
Prevalence figures for developing-country populations are consistently lower
than those in the developed world. For example, a number of surveys carried
out on large samples in China between 1980 and 1985, using a two-stage
procedure and, in some instances, employing the PSE for the second stage
assessment, found low period prevalence rates ranging between 1.9 per 1000
and 4.7 per 1000 (Cheung, 1991).
Age-corrected point or one-year prevalence rates in the studies in Table 4
from developing countries average 3.4 per 1000 (range 0.9 to 8.0; S D 2.09)
compared with a mean rate of 6.3 per 1000 (range 1.3 to 17.4; SD 4.32) in
Europe and North America. The difference between these means is significant
at the 0.001 level (Student's t test). Given the similarity in incidence rates in the
developed and developing worlds, the difference in prevalence rates is unlikely
to be due to a disparity in the rate of occurrence of schizophrenia. It is more
likely to be the result of difficulties in locating cases, higher death rates and (in
the case of point and period prevalence rates) higher recovery rates from
schizophrenia in developing countries.
One report indicated high prevalence rates for psychosis in one area of the
developing world. In a recent review of epidemiological research conducted in

3. Epidemology of schizophrenia

seven countries of Central and South America, a median prevalence rate for
functional psychoses of 11 per 1000 was determined, with a range between 2
and 86 per 1000 (Levav et al., 1989). This unusually high median prevalence
figure and the wide range of rates are likely to be the result of variations
between the studies in diagnostic and case-finding methods, including the use of
the DIS which, as explained above, yields inappropriately high occurrence
rates for schizophrenia.

3.2.3 Pockets of high and low prevalence

1

I
l

Pockets of increased prevalence of schizophrenia have been found in different
parts of the world, including arctic districts of Sweden (77-year prevalence of
17.0 per 1000) (Book et al., 1978), arctic Finland (age-corrected point prevalence of 15.1 per 1000) (Vaisanen, 1975) and the west of Ireland (agecorrected six-month prevalence of 17.4 per 1000) (Torrey et al., 1984). Each of
these areas is characterized by high levels of emigration associated with harsh
subsistence conditions and land shortage. The same is true for the Istrian
peninsula, which has been shown to have a higher prevalence of schizophrenia
than the remainder of Croatia (Crocetti et al., 1971). It is probable that these
prevalence figures are artificially elevated by both the out-migration of healthy
individuals and the return to their original homes of people who fall ill abroad.
In one prevalence study of schizophrenia in the west of Ireland (Torrey et al.,
1984), for example, 14% of the patients reported that most or all of their
siblings had emigrated, making it likely that the person's illness had precluded
emigration, and a further 19% of the patients had themselves emigrated and
returned for reasons probably or possibly connected with their illness. Thus, a
third of the reported prevalence rate in the region could be accounted for by the
effect of migration. In the west of Ireland, furthermore, accurate, standardized
incidence data have recently been gathered, and no elevation in the occurrence
of schizophrenia was detected (Ni Nualliin et al., 1987).
Migration and other non-etiological factors, therefore, probably account
for the observed high prevalence rates in Ireland and other areas. Other
explanations may also apply: in arctic Sweden, for example, the population is a
genetic isolate and the high prevalence of schizophrenia has been traced to a
genetic founder effect.
Migration appears to be one of the most significant factors determining
prevalence rates in Croatia. A recent study conducted there (FolnegoviE &
~olne~ovik-Smalc,
1992) revealed that the prevalence of schizophrenia and the
risk of admission to hospital were greatest in the district where emigration rates
were highest, and lowest in the districts where immigration rates were highest.
There was little variation between districts, however, in first-admission rates,
which are an indicator of incidence. This finding suggests that the effect of
migration is restricted to the current generation of cases and is not cumulative
over time.

Schizophrenia

Migration effects may also help account for the unusually high and low
prevalence rates for schizophrenia found in certain segregated populations in
the developed world. Two conservative Anabaptist agrarian sects in North
America, for example, have been shown to have unusually low prevalence rates
of schizophrenia and high rates of affective disorder. The Hutterite Brethren of
the north-western United States of America and western Canada have been
shown by Eaton & Weil (1955) to have an age-corrected lifetime prevalence of
schizophrenia as low as 2.1 per 1000. Similarly, the Old Order Amish, who live
in farming communities across North America, have a very low age-corrected
five-year prevalence for schizophrenia of 0.5 per 1000 (Egeland &
Hostetter, 1983). This pattern of occurrence could be explained by a lack of
tolerance for deviant behaviour in these conservative communities and the outmigration of psychotic and pre-psychotic individuals. The high prevalence
in these communities of affective disorder, including bipolar illness, however,
argues against this explanation. Alternative interpretations of the data include
a diagnostic bias in both studies favouring bipolar disorder over schizophrenia,
a sociocultural effect on the true occurrence of these disorders (Warner, 1985)
or a limited genetic vulnerability to schizophrenia among the founder members
of both sects.
A high prevalence of schizophrenia has been found in some discrete
populations living on the margin of the industrial world. An elevated agecorrected point prevalence of schizophrenia of 11.0 per 1000, for example, has
been identified among the Cree and Salteaux Indians of northern Saskatchewan, Canada. This is in marked contrast to the low rate of 2.4 per l000 for nonIndians living in the same region (Roy et al., 1970). High rates of unemployment and dependence characterize the Indian population in this region,
whereas the local white population enjoys a more stable agrarian economy.
Out-migration of healthy individuals from the Indian community may explain
the high rate of schizophrenia. A similar phenomenon may explain the
relatively high prevalence rates of schizophrenia among Aboriginals living in
dependent communities around government-sustained missions in various
parts of Australia (Jones & Horne, 1973; Eastwell, 1975). Disabled members of
the Aboriginal population may be more likely to remain in these communities
while healthier members migrate to areas with better employment opportunities. A social effect on the occurrence of the disorder, however, cannot be
excluded. It is possible that the risk of schizophrenia is increased in populations
where exposure to western lifestyles disturbs pre-existing cultural isolation
(Jablensky & Sartorius, 1975; Warner, 1985).

3.2.4 The Epidemiologic Catchment Area study
The large-scale ECA survey has provided a good deal of information about the
epidemiology and the sociodemographic and clinical features of schizophrenia
(Keith et al., 1991). As described in section 3.1.1, however, the incidence of

3. Epidernology of schizophrenia

1

schizophrenia detected in this study was substantially greater than that
identified in other research-a finding that appears to be a result of the use of
non-clinician interviewers producing an unusually high number of falsepositive results. In the ECA study, the lifetime prevalence of schizophrenia,
according to DIS/DSM-I11 criteria, was determined to be 14 per l000 of the
population, substantially above the mean of 5.5 per 1000 for lifetime prevalence for the studies conducted in North America and Europe listed in Table 4.
It is probable that many of the cases identified by the DIS were not, in fact,
schizophrenia; for this reason further data on demographic and clinical features
of these cases are not presented here.
A recent study in the USA, the National Comorbidity Survey, has
confirmed the impression that the prevalence of schizophrenia in the ECA
study was elevated by artefacts. The National Comorbidity Survey used lay
interviewers to administer a revised version of the CID1 to a national
probability sample of 8098 people. The authors found lifetime and 12-month
prevalence rates of "nonaffective psychosis" (schizophrenia, schizophreniform
disorder, schizoaffective disorder, delusional disorder, and atypical psychosis,
diagnosed according to the DSM-111-R criteria) to be respectively 7 and 5 per
1000 population aged 15-54 years. This lifetime rate is substantially lower than
the ECA figure.

1

3.2.5 Family and twin studies

1

1

1

l

1

,

,

/

It has been observed that some of the most striking advances in research on
schizophrenia in the past 25 years have been in the field of genetics (Eaton,
1985). Family studies have made a valuable contribution to understanding the
origins of schizophrenia.
In family studies that include people of widely differing ages, it is useful to
calculate the lifetime morbid risk-the likelihood that someone will suffer an
episode of illness between birth and death-rather than the actual rate of
development of the illness. The Weinberg method of calculating morbid risk,
which adjusts observed occurrence rates to allow for the age of the subjects is
commonly used.
If genetic factors are important in the development of schizophrenia, one
would expect that morbid risk would be higher in relatives of people with the
illness than in the general population, and that the risk would be greater in
those with a closer genetic relationship. Gottesman (1991),drawing data from
about 40 European studies conducted between 1920 and 1987, calculated the
average morbid risk of developing schizophrenia for people with different
degrees of relationship to someone with schizophrenia. The results, displayed in
Fig. 2, indicate that the risk varies with the extent of gene-sharing. Thus the
risk is greatest in the identical twins of schizophrenics (48% risk) and decreases
step by step in the children of two schizophrenic parents, first-degree relatives,
second-degree relatives, third-degree relatives, and finally the general population (1 risk).

Fig. 2
Average risk of developing schizophrenia, according to relationship
to a schizophrenic patient
General population
Spouse
First cousin
Unclelaunt
Nephewlniece
Grandchild
Half sibling

Non-identical twin

I

Identical twin
Child of two
schizophrenic parents

1
Lifetime risk of develop~ngschizophrenia ( O h )

From Gottesman (1991).

The observed data suggest that genetic factors are important in the
development of schizophrenia but are not sufficient to explain completely the
pattern of occurrence. Monozygotic twins, although genetically identical, are
concordant for schizophrenia in only about half of the cases; 89% of schizophrenic subjects do not have a schizophrenic parent, and 63% have no relative,
of any degree of relatedness, with the illness (Gottesman, 1991).
Is the risk of schizophrenia elevated in the offspring of a schizophrenic
individual because the child is raised by a mentally ill parent? Adoption studies
provide information on this question. In Heston's (1966) Oregon study, the
morbid risk of schizophrenia in the adopted offspring of schizophrenic mothers
was 16.6% and, therefore, not lower than the average risk of 13% (Fig. 2) for
offspring reared by their own schizophrenic parents. This finding suggests that
exposure to a schizophrenic parent does not increase the risk of developing the
illness.
A Danish adoption study using a different approach arrived at a similar
conclusion. Kety and associates (Kety, 1988; Wender et al., 1974) evaluated
the biological and adoptive parents of people in Copenhagen who had been
adopted by non-relatives. As Table 5 shows, adopted offspring whose biological
parents suffered from a disorder in the schizophrenia spectrum were nearly
twice as likely as the offspring of non-schizophrenic parents to develop a
schizophrenia-spectrum disorder themselves. The offspring of normal biological parents were equally likely to develop a schizophrenia-spectrum

3. Epidemology of schizophrenia
Table 5
Schizophrenia-spectrum disorders in adopted children, according to presence of schizophrenia in biological and adoptive parents"
Parents
Biological

Adoptive

Adoptees with
schizophreniaspectrum disorders

(%l
Normal
Normal
Schizophrenia

Normal
Schizophrenia
Normal

aAdapted from Wender et al. (1974)

disorder whether they were raised by normal or schizophrenic adoptive parents
(Wender et al., 1974). Again, the conclusion may be drawn that the risk of
developing a schizophrenia-spectrum disorder is not increased by being raised
by a parent with the same disorder.
Further evidence confirming the impression that the home environment
does not contribute to the risk of developing schizophrenia is the finding that
the concordance rate for the illness in identical twins is no lower in twins who
are raised separately (64% concordance) than in those who are raised by their
parents (48%) (Gottesman & Shields, 1982).
One adoptive study suggested that child-raising may have an effect on the
development of schizophrenia. Tienari et al. (1987) examined children born in
Finland between 1928 and 1979 to mothers afflicted with schizophrenia, and
raised by adoptive parents, and compared them with a group of matched
controls. As expected, schizophrenia appeared more frequently in the children
of schizophrenic mothers. However, the adoptive families of the schizophrenic
offspring were clinically rated as being more disturbed than the other families.
The findings suggest that the appearance of schizophrenia may be the result of
an interaction between genetic and environmental factors. It is probable,
however, that the higher levels of disturbance in the adoptive families were, at
least in part, a consequence of raising a severely disturbed schizophrenic or preschizophrenic child.

3.2.6Season of birth
More than 40 articles have appeared on the season of birth of schizophrenic
patients (Bradbury & Miller, 1985; Hare, 1988).The majority report an excess
of births in late winter or spring among treated schizophrenics, the proportion
born at this time being approximately 10% higher than at other times of the
year (Eaton et al., 1988).The findings of the larger studies are illustrated in Fig.
3. Many possible reasons have been suggested for this finding, some artefactual
and some etiological. They include:

3. Epidemology of schizophrenia

1

l

'

I

l
1

(a) a statistical artefact referred to as an "age prevalence effect" (Lewis, 1989),
(b) a seasonal variation in the risk of premature delivery (Miiller & Kleider,
1990),
(c) increased spring and summer mating of the parents of schizophrenics
(6degaard, 1974),
(d) a seasonal effect on maternal endocrine and behavioural factors (Hafner,
1990),
(e) a higher proportion of older women giving birth early in the year (DalCn,
1990),
(f) nutritional effects, including haemorrhagic disease of newborn caused by
vitamin K deficiency (Dalkn, 1990),
(g) the effect on gestation of hot summers (Pasamanick, 1986), cool autumns
(Kendell & Adams, 1991) or cold winters (Hare & Moran, 1981),
(h) the effect of influenza or other viral diseases during the second trimester of
pregnancy (Watson et al., 1984; Mednick et al., 1987; Torrey et al., 1988;
Barr et al., 1990),
(i) the effect of some other infectious agent with a seasonal periodicity similar
to that of influenza (Torrey et al., 1988),
( j ) the effect of drugs taken by the mother to combat the symptoms of
influenza and other seasonal infections (Beiser & Iacono, 1990), and
(k) a genetic effect that increases the risk of schizophrenia but decreases the
risk of perinatal death from winter infections (Pulver et al., 1992).
Lewis (1989) challenged the view that the excess of winter births in
schizophrenia reflects an etiological effect and argued that it is the result of a
distortion of the data caused by an artefact referred to as an "age prevalence"
or "age incidence" effect. This statistical concept is based on the fact that older
people have had more time to develop an illness such as schizophrenia than
those who are younger. Within any year, therefore, people born in January or
February are more likely to develop an illness than those born later in the year.
This will be a relevant factor in any study that observes the usual convention of
using the calendar year, beginning on January 1, to define the year of birth and
the year of admission to hospital. In support of this view, Lewis pointed out
several inconsistent findings in the literature, including a lack of consistency in
establishing an excess of winter births in the southern hemisphere (where one
would expect the age prevalence effect to be reversed). Some northern
hemisphere studies, however, have applied the displacement test proposed by
Lewis to correct for the age prevalence artefact (O'Callaghan et al., 1991), or
have used a life table method to minimize the effect of the calendar year (Pulver
et al., 1983), and have still observed a significant excess of winter births.
Eaton (1991) argued that the existence of an age prevalence or age
incidence effect seems indisputable; it is unclear, however, whether the effect is
sufficient to explain the birth pattern observed. He noted, "with only a 10%
excess of schizophrenic births in the winter and spring, the age incidence effect
will remain a strong candidate for the explanation of the season of birth
findings". He suggested two possible types of evidence that would indicate

Schizophrenia

etiological reasons for the excess of winter births in schizophrenia: (1) the
existence of a stronger degree of association in a specific subset of schizophrenic
patients, and (2) the existence of results tied to a precise etiological hypothesis.
A viral hypothesis, for example, predicts that the association of season of birth
with schizophrenia would be stronger in non-familial rather than familial
schizophrenics: the evidence on this point is equivocal, however, as is shown
below.
Several researchers have examined the effect of temperature as a possible
cause of the seasonal variation in births. Pasamanick (1986) suggested that the
winter excess of births of schizophrenic patients may be a result of the effect of
hot summers on gestation, but studies in Sweden (McNeil et al., 1975), the
United Kingdom (Hare & Moran, 198l ) , and Minnesota, USA (Watson et al.,
1984) have failed to find an association between the winter birth rate and
temperatures in the previous summer or autumn. Hare & Moran (1981),
however, found an association between cold winters and births of schizophrenic
patients in England, and an analysis of data from the Scottish Psychiatric Case
Register (Kendell & Adams, 1991) indicated that an elevated incidence of
schizophrenic births in the late winter and spring is related to low mean
monthly temperatures six months previously, in the autumn. It is possible that
a nutritional, infectious or other factor associated with cool weather could exert
an effect in the second trimester of fetal development.
Miiller & Kleider (1990), analysing data on nearly 9000 births in the
Federal Republic of Germany between 1967 and 1971, showed that premature
births were more common in March. They suggested that minimal brain
damage associated with premature delivery could produce a seasonal excess of
births of people with schizophrenia or other brain disorders. Hafner et al.
(1987),in fact, reported a winter excess ofbirths, not only in schizophrenia, but
also for mental retardation, depression and bipolar disorder, all ofwhich might,
theoretically, be increased in those born prematurely.
Maternal age is strongly correlated with various obstetric complications.
Dalkn (1990) pointed out that schizophrenic patients tend to be born to women
with an elevated maternal age, and that births to older women, according to
data from Denmark, Sweden and the United Kingdom, are more likely to
occur in the early months of the year. Maternal age, he suggested, could
explain the link between schizophrenia and winter births. Any neurodevelopmental hypothesis, including obstetric causes, would gain support if it were
determined that the winter excess of schizophrenic births were confined to
patients without a family history of mental disorder. As noted above, however,
the findings on this point are equivocal. Studies that examined family history
and season of birth are fairly evenly divided between those that confirm and
those that reject this suggestion (Pulver et al., 1992). For example, one recent
study (07Callaghan et al., 1991) found that only schizophrenic patients
without a family history for the illness demonstrated an excess of winter births,
while another (Pulver et al., 1992) found the reverse-that schizophrenic
patients born in the months of February to May had a stronger family history of
schizophrenia.

3. Epidemology of schizophrenia

A recent study in Milan, Italy (Sacchetti et al., 1992),provided evidence for
a neurodevelopmental effect producing the excess of winter births among
schizophrenics. A large number of patients with schizophrenia and major
affective disorder were assessed for signs of brain damage by computerized
tomography (CT). Patients with schizophrenia born between December and
April were more likely to have signs of ventricular enlargement (but not
cortical atrophy), and the abnormality was most common in those with no
family history of the disorder. The findings were specific for schizophrenia;
there was no association between birth date and ventricular enlargement in
patients with affective disorder.
Maternal infection during gestation has been studied by several researchers
as a possible neurodevelopmental cause for the seasonal fluctuation in schizophrenic births. Watson et al. (1984) reported an association between the
annual incidence of births of schizophrenic patients and the incidence of
diphtheria, pneumonia and influenza in Minnesota between 1916 and 1958.
Torrey et al. (1988) found an association between births of schizophrenic
subjects in Connecticut and Massachussetts and the reported rates of measles
and varicella, but not influenza. Mednick et al. (1987) found an increased risk
of schizophrenia among individuals who were in the second trimester of fetal
development during the 1957 influenza epidemic in Helsinki, Finland. In a
similar study of eight health regions in England and Wales (O'Callaghan et al.,
1991), the number of schizophrenic patients born five months after the peak of
the 1957 influenza epidemic was 88% higher than the average number of such
births for the corresponding period in the two previous and two successive
years. In Scotland, however, national data revealed no increased risk of
schizophrenia associated with the 1918, 1919 or 1957 influenza epidemics
(Kendell & Kemp, 1989). In the United States of America, a ten-state study
failed to find an increase in schizophrenic births associated with the 1957
influenza epidemic (Bowler & Torrey, 1990), and in the Netherlands Selten &
Slaets (1994) found no correlation between exposure to the epidemic in the
second trimester and subsequent development of schizophrenia. However, Barr
et al. (1990) established that higher than average rates of influenza, occurring
in the sixth month of gestation, were associated with an elevated incidence of
schizophrenic births in Denmark. Takei et al. (unpublished data) studied a
sample of schizophrenic patients born in Denmark between 1915 and 1970, and
established that exposure to influenza in utero was associated with an increased
risk of schizophrenia. The number of babies who subsequently developed
schizophrenia rose by 12% for every l00 000 cases of influenza in the general
population in the sixth month of gestation. In a recent study of schizophrenic
patients and influenza epidemics between 1939 and 1960 in England and
Wales, Sham et al. (1992) found that exposure to influenza between the third
and seventh month of gestation was associated with schizophrenia in adult life.
Takei et al. (1994), using data from a large cohort of patients born in England
and Wales between 1938 and 1965, found that females, but not males, exposed
to influenza epidemics 5 months before birth had a significantly greater rate of
schizophrenia as adults.

Schizophrenia

It is widely held that respiratory viral infections are frequently brought into
the home by young children. To test the prediction that the risk of schizophrenia is lower in first-born children, and increased in individuals who had
siblings of a young age while in utero, Sham et al. (1993) analysed data from a
Swedish family study. Their results are consistent with these predictions. In
particular, having siblings aged 3-4 years was associated with a significantly
increased risk of schizophrenia, even after allowing for birth order, total
number of siblings, and other potential confounders. The authors point out
that these results, if replicated, could provide indirect support for the maternal
viral infection hypothesis.
One of the most recent reports on this topic to date (Adams et al., 1993)an analysis of Danish, English and Scottish data-is of particular interest since
the researchers included some who had previously come to negative conclusions
about the effect of maternal viral infection. The study found that exposure to
the 1957 influenza epidemic in mid-pregnancy was associated with an increased incidence of schizophrenia, at least in female offspring, in all three
countries. The effect appears to have been greatest in the fourth and sixth
months of pregnancy. They also confirmed Sham et al.'s finding of a long-term
association between season of birth and exposure to influenza in mid-pregnancy (in this case, in the sixth and seventh months) in England, but could find
no such relationship in the Danish and Scottish data. The authors concluded
that "despite several other negative studies . . . maternal influenza during the
middle third of intrauterine development, or something closely associated with
it, is implicated in the etiology of some cases of schizophrenia".
There are a number ofdifficulties inherent in this area of research (Mednick
et al., 1987). For example, there is generally no direct evidence that the
subject's mother suffered a viral infection; the studies usually rely on hospital
diagnosis; and the determination of stage of gestation at the time of exposure to
the epidemic is based on date of birth. The infant may have had a pre-term or
post-term delivery, however, and exposure may have occurred outside the
official epidemic "window". One study that did derive direct evidence proved
negative. The British perinatal mortality survey (Crow & Done, 1992)
examined perinatal records and subsequent psychiatric hospital admissions for
everyone born in England, Scotland and Wales in the week of 3-9 March 1958,
a few months after the 1957 influenza epidemic. The offspring of 945 mothers
who were known to have suffered from influenza in the second trimester of
pregnancy failed to show an increased risk of developing schizophrenia.
Mednick et al. (1987) concluded that the viral effect may be one of many
potential perturbations of gestation. They suggested that it may be less the type
than the timing of the disturbance during fetal neural development that is
critical in determining the risk of schizophrenia.
If an association between maternal viral infection and the subsequent
development of schizophrenia is confirmed, it would point towards a number of
etiological possibilities. Exposure to a virus could interfere with the process of
cell migration in the fetal brain, it could produce a post-infectious encephalitis
with a latency of 15 years or more, or it could predispose the individual to

3. Epidemology of schizophrenia

the later development of an autoimmune disease (Torrey et al., 1988). It is also
possible that some unidentified infectious agent with a periodicity similar to the
viral infection is responsible, or that the drugs used by the mother to combat the
infection produce an effect on the fetus (Beiser & Iacono, 1990).
If season of birth variation is the result of a neurodevelopmental effect, the
birth date will be associated with differences in age of onset, course and
outcome of schizophrenia. A recent study, however, using data from two
sources (the Edinburgh Psychiatric Case Register and the psychiatric inpatient records of the Scottish Health Service), and comparing two large
populations of schizophrenic patients born in winter (January-March) and in
summer (June-October) failed to find any evidence of such associations
(Kendell & Kemp, 1987). Although there was a 9% excess of schizophrenic
births in the first three months of the year among the Scottish patients, there
were no detectable differences between patients born in winter or in summer in
age of onset, sex ratio or prognosis.
The study of season of birth has proved to be a valuable area of research and
may, eventually, uncover a risk factor which is relevant in a significant
proportion of cases of schizophrenia.

3.2.7 Prevalence in different socioeconomic groups
In developed countries, schizophrenia and other mental disorders are more
common in the lower socioeconomic groups. Faris & Dunham (1939) found
that the highest prevalence rates for treated schizophrenia were concentrated
in Chicago's poorer districts. From a rate of 7 per 1000 adults in the inner-city
areas, the prevalence of treated schizophrenia declined gradually through the
more affluent sections of the city to the lowest rates ofbelow 2.5 per l000 adults
in the most prosperous areas. A number of other studies have confirmed that
high rates of mental disorder, particularly schizophrenia, are concentrated in
central low-income districts of many American and European cities (Schroeder, 1942; Gerard & Houston, 1953; Gardner & Babigian, 1966; Klee et al.,
1967; Sundby & Nyhus, 1963; Hare, 1956). Schizophrenic patients in Nottingham, England, who took part in the WHO study of determinants of outcome
(Giggs & Cooper, 1987) were found to be concentrated in central urban areas
of low socioeconomic status.
Clark (1949) demonstrated that Chicago residents in low-income occupations had a higher incidence of treated schizophrenia than workers of higher
status. This observation has been confirmed in a number of studies. In a survey
in New Haven, Connecticut, Hollingshead & Redlich (1958) found a gradient
of progressively greater prevalence of treated schizophrenia in the lower
socioeconomic groups. The prevalence of illness was eleven times greater in the
lowest group than in the highest. Odegaard (1956) demonstrated that first
admissions for schizophrenia to all psychiatric hospitals in Norway were most
common among workers of low status, such as ordinary seamen and farm
labourers, and one-third as frequent among owners and managers of businesses

and other high-status occupations. In London, Stein (1957) demonstrated a
social-class gradient for the incidence and prevalence of mental illness, with the
highest rates in the lowest classes; the gradient was particularly evident for
schizophrenia. Eaton (1985), in reviewing the data, concluded that, using three
basic categories of social class, it is common to find a three-to-one difference in
rates between the lowest and the highest classes.
Three principal explanations could account for the high rates of this illness
in the poorer groups. The social drzft (or social selection) theory suggests that
people who are in the early stages of schizophrenia drift down to a lower social
class as a result of their mental impairment. The social stress (or social causation)
hypothesis proposes that the social stresses of poverty, deprivation and social
disorganization increase the risk of developing schizophrenia. Finally, a
neurodevelopmental explanation, which has been advanced to explain the high
incidence of schizophrenia among immigrants in the United Kingdom (Eagles,
1991b), may also apply to the social-class gradient: lower-class members of the
population may encounter more neurodevelopmental risk from obstetric
complications, perinatal infection and other factors. The neurodevelopmental
hypothesis is a variant of the social causation theory.
The neurodevelopmental hypothesis derives support from the evidence that
obstetric complications are significantly associated with subsequent development ofschizophrenia (Jacobsen & Kinney, 1980; Parnas et al., 1982; Lewis &
Murray, 1987; Eagles et al., 1990) and that, in the United States of America
particularly, infant mortality rates (an indicator of poor prenatal and obstetric
care) are substantially higher among the poor.
Dohrenwend and co-workers (1992) demonstrated a social-class gradient
for the prevalence of schizophrenia in Israel, with higher rates among the less
well educated. However, they argue that the effect could not have a social
causation because lower rates of schizophrenia were found among the more
disadvantaged Israelis of North African background than among those of
European background. Other factors, however, such as higher death rates
among the disabled or culture-specific protective effects, may explain the lower
rate of schizophrenia in north African Israelis.
Support for the social drift theory comes from a study conducted by
Goldberg & Morrison (1963) in the United Kingdom which demonstrated
that, although schizophrenic males were over-represented in the lowest socioeconomic class, the social class of their fathers and other male family members
was distributed much as in the general population. Similar findings have come
from studies conducted in the USA (Turner & Wagenfeld, 1967).
A more recent study in the United Kingdom (Jones et al., 1993) confirmed
that schizophrenic patients often fail to achieve the same occupational status as
their fathers before the onset of illness, and also revealed that a similar effect
did not occur in patients with affective psychosis. The underachieving schizophrenic patients also had poorer educational qualifications than the other
schizophrenic subjects despite similar I Q scores before illness, a finding that
suggests a developmental effect.

3. Epidemology of schizophrenia

The social drift theory encounters difficulty in explaining the observation
that the social-class gradient for the occurrence of schizophrenia is not usually
observed in rural areas and is in fact inverted in the developing world. The link
between schizophrenia and social class has been conclusively demonstrated
only for city populations; the relationship is strongest in large cities and weaker
in small cities and most rural areas. In the small town of Hagerstown,
Maryland, for example, the prevalence of schizophrenia was not found to be
related to social class (Kohn, 1973) and the same is true for Jaco's (1960) study
of the state of Texas. At least nine studies conducted in India over the past 50
years (Elnagar et al., 1971; Dube & Kumar, 1972; Nandi et al., 1980; Torrey,
1987) have demonstrated that the prevalence of schizophrenia is greater in the
higher castes than among the lower castes. Such a pattern cannot be explained
by social drift, but could result from a higher death rate or recovery rate among
schizophrenic individuals in the lower castes.
Two studies conducted 15 years apart in China (Province of Taiwan) in
1946-48 (Lin, 1953) and in 1961-63 (Lin et al., 1969), before and after a
period of rapid industrial development, revealed a switch from one pattern of
occurrence of schizophrenia to another. In the earlier study, the prevalence
pattern for schizophrenia was found to be similar to that described for India,
with higher rates being observed in the better-educated groups. In the second
study, the prevalence gradient shifted to resemble that found in the industrial
world. As Table 6 shows, the change is due to a decrease in the very high rates
among the well-educated upper-class population observed in the earlier study.
Since prevalence rates in the lower classes were not higher in the second study,
the change in the pattern is not a result of reduced death rates or recovery rates
in the lower classes.
The reason for the high prevalence rates among higher-caste Indians and
the well-educated in the earlier Taiwanese study is not clear. They cannot be
due to social drift: people cannot change their caste, nor would they "drift" into
higher education. Many of the studies were field surveys and, therefore, would
not be influenced by differences between groups in treatment-seeking behaviour. Changes in fetal and neonatal health, however, could produce a neurodevelopmental effect. Improvements in neonatal care, in the early phase of
industrialization, are likely to become available first to the better-off. Such a
bias would increase the tendency for children born with obstetric complications
in higher-class families to survive infancy with brain damage and for similar
lower-class children to die early in life. This, in turn, would lead to higher rates
of schizophrenia in the higher socioeconomic groups. If the later phase of
industrial development brought advances in obstetric care selectively to the
upper classes, this would eventually lead to lower rates of brain damage and a
subsequent decrease in the incidence of schizophrenia in the upper classes.
This effect could be compounded by the influence of nutritional changes on
the rate of obstetric complications in different groups in developing countries.
For example, a significant proportion of women with poor nutrition have
delivery complications as a result of pelvic contraction from childhood rickets.

Schizophrenia
Table 6
Prevalence of schizophrenia in China (Province of Taiwan) 1946-48
and 1961-63a
Prevalence per 1000 population

Social class
Upper
Middle
Lower

1946-48

1961-63

3.5
1.2
4.5

0.8
1.l
2.1

Occupation
Professional
Merchant
Salaried worker
Labourer
Farmer, fisherman
Unemployed
Education
College
Senior high school
Junior high school
Elementary education
No formal education
'Data from Lln et al. (1969).

Improvements in nutrition during industrial development reach the better-off
groups first, but the first generation ofwomen who gain this benefit are likely to
be relatively small in stature and have a high rate of pelvic deformity. Their
children, however-the first generation to have better nutrition from the
outset-are bigger. Consequently, this first generation of more affluent women
will have relatively small pelvic dimensions and will carry large, well nourished
fetuses. The result is likely to be more difficult deliveries and more brain
damage in the new generation of infants (Warner, 1994).
I t is also possible that the early period of industrialization exerts unusual
labour-market stresses on the better-educated workers. There may be a gradual
switch from initial high levels of employment-related stress among the higher
groups, who are more involved in the newly formed wage-labour force, to
greater stress on the lower socioeconomic groups who become increasingly
affected by poor work conditions, unemployment, poverty and deprivation.
Such social and economic stresses, if they were to trigger the onset of
schizophrenia, might produce a pattern of incidence in which the better-off are
initially more severely afflicted and then less so (Warner, 1985).
Research conducted by Link et al. (1986) supports the possibility that
adverse working conditions are a risk factor for schizophrenia. The researchers
found that the first full-time jobs of people who subsequently developed
schizophrenia were more likely to have had stressful features, such as hazards,
fumes and extremes of humidity, heat, cold and noise, than the first jobs of

3. Epidemology of schizophrenia

community controls or patients suffering from depression. This finding could
not be accounted for by downward social mobility in the schizophrenic group.
To summarize, several class-related factors acting with different force in
different areas appear to produce the observed patterns of prevalence for
schizophrenia. Social drift is almost certainly an important factor in urban
industrial populations: neurodevelopmental effects and social stress may have
an impact more broadly around the world.

3.2.8 Other risk factors
Urban residence

A number of studies indicate that schizophrenia is less common among rural
than urban residents. The incidence of treated schizophrenia is consistently
higher in urban areas than in rural districts, though this may be because rural
dwellers are less likely to seek treatment or because people with schizophrenia
and pre-schizophrenic features tend to drift towards urban centres (Eaton,
1974). Nevertheless, a recent study in Stockholm County, Sweden (BorgH,
unpublished information), which used a broad-based sampling method, including general practitioners, prisons and social welfare offices, found a steep
prevalence gradient for functional psychosis from rural, through suburban to
the urban area. This finding suggests that the urbanlrural gradient is not
attributable to differences in participation in treatment.
Another recent study (Lewis et al., 1992), which looked at the association
between place of upbringing and the incidence of schizophrenia among nearly
50 000 Swedish conscripts, argued against the possibility that schizophrenic
individuals tend to drift into cities because of the illness or its prodrome. The
researchers found that the incidence of schizophrenia was 1.65 times greater
among men brought up in cities than in those who had a rural upbringing.
Various environmental factors, therefore, may contribute to the urban concentration of schizophrenia: these include life-event stress and neurological
damage from viral infection or childhood head trauma, all of which are more
common in cities.
Marital status

Marital status has been found to be associated with risk of schizophrenia in
several studies. The increased risk for unmarried as compared with married
people ranges between 2.6 and 7.2; five studies reported an increased risk of
3.0-4.7 (Eaton, 1985). Women tend to marry earlier than men and to have a
later onset of schizophrenia. It has been suggested that marriage exerts a
protective effect which delays the onset of the illness in women. Alternatively,
the illness in its early stages may act as a barrier to marriage. Eaton (1975),
using incidence data from the Maryland Psychiatric Case Register, and
Riecher-Rossler et al. (1992) have concluded that the latter explanation is
more likely.

3. Epidemology of schizophrenia

1

1

consequence of whether the migrant enters the new culture at a high or low
social status. Those who encounter poverty and stress are routinely found to
experience higher rates of psychotic illness (Warner, 1985). O n the other hand
a number of studies have indicated that immigrants who enter a new culture
with a high status experience rates of hospitalization for schizophrenia which
are lower than those of other immigrants and close to those for native-born
residents (Cade & Krupinski, 1962; Halevi, 1963; Malzberg, 1969; Cochrane,
1977).
A recent review of admission rates for schizophrenia in the United
Kingdom provides support for this explanation. Among the four largest
migrant populations living in England, hospital admission rates are higher
among those born in India, Pakistan or the Caribbean, but the Irish have rates
comparable to the population of Ireland. The higher admission rates can be
explained, to a large extent, by demographic and socioeconomic factors for
those born in India and Pakistan and by adverse post-migration experiences
among the Caribbean population (Cochrane & Bal, 1987).
A series of studies of Afro-Caribbeans in the United Kingdom unexpectedly
observed that schizophrenia is more common in second-generation immigrants
than in the first generation. This finding supports the conclusion that the
elevation in schizophrenia rates may be explained by (a) obstetric complications secondary to changes in maternal nutrition and (b) improved fetal
survival resulting from better perinatal care (as discussed in section 3.2.7). An
increase in obstetric complications and infant survival in immigrant women
would not contribute at all to the rate of the illness among the first generation
but would affect their offspring. A study by Harrison et al. (1988) demonstrated that the incidence of carefully diagnosed schizophrenia among AfroCaribbeans in Nottingham was at least six times greater than among the
indigenous population and that the vast majority of patients were second
generation. A study in Birmingham showed that the schizophrenia rate was
substantially greater among Afro-Caribbeans born in the United Kingdom
than among first-generation immigrants or non-Caribbeans (McGovern &
Cope, 1987). A study of Afro-Caribbeans in south London (Wessely et al.,
1991) confirmed that the risk of schizophrenia was substantially greater in
second-generation immigrants.
The most recent study on this issue was in central Manchester, and
surveyed psychiatric admissions, over a period of four years, of people of
European, Afro-Caribbean, and Asian extraction, taking particular care to
differentiate between first- and second-generation immigrants. Rates for both
first admissions and re-admissions were greatest among Afro-Caribbeans; rates
among those of Asian extraction were similar to those for Europeans, except for
the 16-29-year age group, who had lower rates than Europeans. In the AfroCaribbean group, the higher rates were largely due to increased rates of
schizophrenia; the highest rate occurred in second-generation Afro-Caribbeans
(born in the United Kingdom) and was nine times that in Europeans (Thomas
et al., 1993). The implication of these observations is that immigration itself
does not increase the risk of schizophrenia: it is being born in the new country

Schizophrenia

that is associated with increased hazards. An increased rate of maternal viral
infection in the host country (Gupta, 1993), obstetric factors, or changing
immunological responses could explain the increased risk to second-generation
immigrants.
Seasonal variation

There is evidence of a seasonal variation in rates of admission to hospital for
schizophrenia, with a peak in late spring and early summer (Hare, 1988). This
seasonality has been observed in a number of countries over the past 180 years,
but there appears to be no clear explanation for it.
CO-occurringdisorders

Some illnesses appear to be less common among people with schizophrenia
than in the general population: an example is rheumatoid arthritis and related
conditions. In a review of 14 epidemiological studies carried out on this subject
between 1934 and 1985, Eaton et al. (1992) found that the median prevalence
rate of rheumatoid arthritis among schizophrenic subjects was 0.47%, significantly lower than the expected 1-3%. Three of the studies had reported a
strong inverse relationship between the two disorders. A number of explanations for this finding have been proposed, including nutritional, hormonal,
psychosocial, genetic and immunological mechanisms; autoimmune theories
appear to be especially worthy of further investigation.
Many studies have shown that mortality is greater in schizophrenic
patients: the increased death rate is seen for most causes of death, with the
exception of cancer. Some researchers have suggested that cancer occurs less
often in schizophrenic patients but this has not been proved (Gulbinat et
al., 1992). Of particular interest is a study from Ireland conducted by Masterson & O'Shea (1984) which revealed that, although smoking is heavier and
more than twice as common in schizophrenic patients than in the general
population, the risk of lung cancer in the patient group is no greater. A recent
WHO multi-site record-linkage study (Gulbinat et al., 1992) similarly showed
that the risk of lung cancer was significantly lower for a large sample of
schizophrenic patients in Denmark and was not elevated for schizophrenics in
Hawaii, USA, and in Nagasaki, Japan. These findings suggest the possibility of
a linkage in schizophrenia to a lung cancer suppressant gene or of an antitumour effect of phenothiazines (used in the treatment of schizophrenia).
Concern has been expressed that elevated serum prolactin resulting from the
use of phenothiazines may increase the risk of breast cancer in female patients:
findings on this point have been inconsistent. The WHO multi-site study found
no increased risk for patients in Denmark but did find an increased risk of breast
cancer in Hawaii and Nagasaki, which gives cause for continued concern.

3.3 Epidemiological studies in primary health care facilities
Few studies have assessed the prevalence of schizophrenia in primary care
settings. In one of the first studies, Parkes et al. (1962) found that more than

70% of a sample of schizophrenic patients discharged from London mental
hospitals saw their general practitioner at least once in the following year: over
halfwere seen more than five times. Retrospective surveys have found that 2%
ofprimary care patients suffer from long-term mental illness: it is likely that the
majority of these were schizophrenic.
Prospective studies have found an uneven distribution. Shepherd et al.
(1966), studying a number of general practices, found that among some 15000
patients at risk during a twelve-month period, 0.6% had a diagnosis of
psychosis. Using a two-stage assessment methodology, Schulberg et al. (1985)
administered the DIS to 294 primary care patients; only one patient (0.3%)
received a diagnosis of schizophrenia.
In a small town in Germany, Dilling (1980) found that four subjects
(0.3%), out of a total of 1231 assessed by primary physicians during one year,
were diagnosed as suffering from schizophrenia; the same number was found by
a research interviewer.
Among 2743 patients who consulted a general practitioner in the course of a
year, a psychiatric morbidity prevalence rate of 7% was found (Casey et al.,
1984). Of these patients, schizophrenia was diagnosed (using the PSE) in 13%
by the general practitioner and in 12% by the research interviewer; using the
CATEGO diagnostic system the rate was 5%.
A survey in Salford, United Kingdom, in 1984 found that, whereas 75% of
a group of 557 identified schizophrenic patients were in contact with psychiatrists, only seven were solely in contact with a general practitioner in the
course of the year (Bamrah et al., 1991). The seven patients had been seen by
psychiatrists in the past. The proportion in contact with a general practitioner
alone was substantially smaller than in 1974. Despite the recent emphasis on
community care in the United Kingdom, it appears that the care of schizophrenic patients is still overwhelmingly the responsibility of hospital-based
psychiatric personnel.
In a survey of 369 general practitioners in the United Kingdom, 110
declared that the discharge of adult long-term mentally ill patients has had an
effect on their practices (Kendrick et al., 1991). Most (225) estimated that they
had 10 or fewer such patients on their list. Having higher numbers was
significantly associated with practising in Greater London or within 5 km of a
large mental hospital and having contact with a psychiatrist who visited the
practice.
It is difficult to provide a precise figure for the proportion of general practice
patients who suffer from schizophrenia. Several variables, including the
availability of health and mental health services, the distance from a mental
hospital, the extent of the deinstitutionalization process, and links between
general practices and psychiatric services, can affect this rate. The likelihood of
patients discharged from mental health facilities becoming linked to general
practices may indeed be increased, or there may be a reporting bias, resulting
from increased awareness of patients by the general practitioners. Patients with
schizophrenia have been found to consult their general practitioner more often
than the average patient, though no more often than those with chronic

Schizophrenia

physical disorders (Nazareth et al., 1993). In inner city areas, lack of
appropriate social networks may cause discharged mentally ill patients to have
more contact with their general practitioners, thereby raising the doctor's level
of awareness.
The only available data for the developing countries are those obtained by a
WHO collaborative study carried out among 1624 patients attending primary
health facilities in four countries (Colombia, India, Philippines and Sudan).
The patients were assessed in a two-stage procedure, using a screening
instrument followed by the PSE; a schizophrenia prevalence of 3.1 was found
(Harding et al., 1980).

3.4 Epidemiological studies in psychiatric facilities
As might be expected, people with schizophrenia are over-represented in
psychiatric institutions as compared with the rate found in the community or in
primary care settings. For instance, in the United States, on a selected day in
1986, there were a total of 69994 inpatients in psychiatric facilities with a
primary diagnosis of schizophrenia, corresponding to 43.5% of all psychiatric
inpatients on that date. This was the largest diagnostic group: the second
largest, those with affective disorders, accounted for 21.6% of the total
(Manderscheid & Sonnenschein, 1990).
Considerable differences in the relative frequency of these two major
diagnostic groupings were found in the different types of facilities. In state and
county mental hospitals, Veterans' Administration medical centres, and
multiservice mental health organizations, schizophrenia was the most frequent
diagnosis (58%, 41 yo and 4474, respectively). In private psychiatric hospitals
and non-federal general hospitals, affective disorders were most common (50%
and 37%, respectively).
In 1980 there were 369402 admissions with a primary diagnosis of
schizophrenia (23% of all psychiatric admissions). Again, schizophrenia was
more common among people admitted to state and county mental hospitals,
Veterans' Administration medical centres and multiservice mental health
organizations. Because they tend to stay longer in hospital, people with
schizophrenia comprised a much higher percentage of the population under
care than of those admitted. The median length of inpatient stay for people
with a diagnosis of schizophrenia was 19 days; the median stay was longer for
those who were inpatients in state and county mental hospitals (38 days).
Among all psychiatric patients receiving outpatient care on the census day
in 1986, there were 298808 people (21.6% of the total) with a diagnosis of
schizophrenia; approximately the same proportion had affective disorders
(22.3%). In the same year 166 737 people (7.8%) were admitted to outpatient
care with a diagnosis of schizophrenia.
In Ireland, in 1988, the proportion of psychiatric patients diagnosed as
suffering from schizophrenia was 180 per 100000 admissions and 33.8 per
100000 among first admissions (O'Connor & Walsh, 1991). The rate of

3. Epidemology of schizophrenia

schizophrenia among admissions was higher for males (210 per 100 000) than
for females (149 per 100000). Schizophrenia was most common among
admissions in the age group 35-44 years and among unskilled manual workers.
More than half of the patients admitted with such a diagnosis stayed in hospital
less than one month.

3.5 Epidemiological studies in other facilities or among special
population groups

3.5.1 Prisoners
One review of the literature concluded that 6-8% of the 147 000 inmates of
local jails in the United States ofAmerica in the 1970s were psychotic (Warner,
1985). People with psychosis, however, accounted for only 2-5% of people
admitted to jail, leading to the conclusion that the mentally ill were being
detained longer than other offenders (Lamb & Grant, 1982).
Similarly, 8% of a large sample of federal prisoners in the USA surveyed in
1969 were diagnosed as psychotic (Roth & Ervin, 1971). A review of surveys
carried out in prisons in the United Kingdom, on the other hand (Coid, 1984),
concluded that psychoses (including schizophrenia) were not frequent, but
highlighted the methodological limitations of many studies.
Three recent surveys employing reliable methodology have been carried
out among prisoners. In Canada, Bland et al. (1990) used the DIS and other
questionnaires to interview 180 randomly selected male prisoners aged 18-44
years. A comparison was made with 1006 similarly aged male residents of
Edmonton who were interviewed using the same instruments. The prevalence
rate for schizophrenia among the prisoners (2.2%) was substantially higher
than the rate found in the community sample (0.6%).
In the USA, Teplin (1990) calculated the current and lifetime prevalence
rates of schizophrenia among 627 male jail detainees interviewed with the DIS
and compared them with those found in 348 1 male subjects, aged 18-60 years,
living in the community and included in the ECA sample. The author found a
current prevalence rate for schizophrenia in the sample of detainees of 2.74%
compared with 0.91 in the community sample: the lifetime prevalence rates
were respectively 3.71 % and 1.70%. The differences between the jail and
general populations continued to be significant after controlling for race and
age.
In the United Kingdom, Gunn et al. (1991) administered a semi-structured
interview to a 5% sample of men serving prison sentences (404 young offenders
and 1365 adults): 1.2% of the inmates were diagnosed as suffering from
schizophrenia according to ICD-9 criteria. This rate is comparable to other
prison surveys in the United Kingdom which used clinical criteria (Roger,
1950; Gunn et al., 1978). Although this prevalence rate is comparable to that
found in the community, it nevertheless represents a considerable problem
given the limited array of therapeutic options available in prisons.

3.5.2 The homeless
A review of published data suggests that, between 1960 and 1985, 25-50% of
homeless men in large American cities suffered from a psychotic disorder.
Among women the proportion was higher-by
some estimates, 75-90%
(Warner, 1985). In a recent review of eight studies published on this topic since
1984, with sample sizes ranging from 49 to 328 homeless people (Fischer &
Breakey, 1991), lifetime prevalence rates of schizophrenia ranging from 1.4%
to 30.3% were found. Two of these studies, with large samples and careful
methodology, deserve particular mention.
Koegel et al. (1988) conducted a survey among 328 homeless people living
in inner Los Angeles, using a version of the DIS modified to make it more
sensitive for a homeless population. An overall lifetime prevalence of schizophrenia of 13.1% was found: this compares with a rate of 0.5% in the Los
Angeles general community sample in the ECA study (n = 3055). The risk
ratio for schizophrenia in the homeless sample compared with the community
was 26: 1. The lifetime prevalence rate was especially high among the longterm homeless (18%). The prevalence of schizophrenia among the homeless is,
clearly, much higher than in the general population but, given the tendency of
the DIS to produce a high number of false-positive results for schizophrenia, the
prevalence figure in this study should be treated with caution.
In a sample of homeless people in Baltimore, USA (Breakey et al., 1989),
125 men and 78 women were examined by psychiatrists using the Standardized
Psychiatric Examination. A schizophrenia prevalence rate of 12% among men
and 17% among women was found; in addition, a high rate of comorbidity,
especially of alcohol and substance abuse disorders, was detected in the sample.
Finally, a recent study compared the prevalence of schizophrenia among the
homeless residents of Edinburgh hostels in 1966 and 1992. Despite a 66%
reduction in the number of beds available for psychiatric care of adults in the
region during that period, the prevalence of schizophrenia among this homeless
population was lower in 1992 (9%) than in 1966 (25%), even after other
changes in the population were taken into account (Geddes et al., 1994).

3.6 Epidemiological research and the etiology of schizophrenia

3.6.1 Implications of neuroanatomical and neurophysiological
research
Research on brain structure and function has advanced our understanding of
the etiology of schizophrenia and has raised new questions that need to be
addressed by epidemiological research. Post-mortem studies of schizophrenic
patients have revealed degenerative changes in the limbic system, an area of the
brain that is important in the regulation of emotion and response to stress; such
changes are not found in non-schizophrenics (Averback, 1981; Stevens, 1982).
In addition, over 50 studies using computerized tomographic (CT) scans have

3. Epidemology of schizophrenia

found evidence of mild cerebral atrophy in a proportion of schizophrenic
patients (Van Horn & McManus, 1992). The changes, which include enlargement of the ventricles of the brain and widening of the cerebral fissures, also
occur in degenerative brain conditions and in some other psychiatric patients
(Weinberger & Kleinman, 1986).
The cause of cerebral atrophy in schizophrenia is not known. Since the
abnormalities are found equally in "first-break" schizophrenics (those experiencing their first psychotic episode) and in chronic patients, it is unlikely
that the changes are due to treatment. The atrophy does not indicate that
schizophrenia is a degenerative brain disease: it is not progressive, it is not
specific to schizophrenia, and it is not present in all cases. The changes occur in
only about a quarter of schizophrenic patients. There is no well defined group
with enlarged cerebral ventricles: the changes seen on the C T scans are
distributed along a continuum from normal to large (Weinberger & Kleinman,
1986). The most probable explanation is that the cerebral atrophy found in
some schizophrenics is an indicator of earlier brain injury which increased the
person's vulnerability to the illness. Such brain damage might result, for
example, from the effects of drugs administered to the person's mother during
pregnancy, maternal viral illness, birth trauma, postnatal infection or a similar
assault. It will be important to establish which, ifany, ofthese factors is, in fact,
associated with an increased risk of schizophrenia. The perinatal mortality
survey in the United Kingdom (Done et al., 1991) is an example of a well
designed epidemiological study in which relationships were sought between
multiple perinatal risk factors and the subsequent development of a variety of
psychiatric conditions in a nationwide sample of births during a single week.
Changes seen on C T scans are not restricted to one clinical subtype of the
illness, but schizophrenic patients with these signs of brain damage have some
characteristic clinical features. Patients with evidence of cerebral atrophy have
more severe negative symptoms of schizophrenia, such as apathy, withdrawal
and poverty of ideas: positive symptoms, such as hallucinations and delusions,
are less prominent. They are also more likely to display poor premorbid
functioning, to show signs of neurological impairment, to respond poorly to
medication and to have an unfavourable outcome (Weinberger & Kleinman,
1986). Crow ( 1980) suggested that schizophrenia could be classified as type 1,
in which positive symptoms predominate, or type 2, in which negative
symptoms are prominent; such subtyping may be useful in epidemiological
research to evaluate the importance of neurodevelopmental risk factors.
It is likely that both inheritance and early brain damage are risk factors for
schizophrenia. Studies of identical twins discordant for schizophrenia, for
example, reveal that the affected twin is more likely to have a history of
obstetric complications at birth (McNeil, 1987) and evidence of brain damage
(as shown on C T scans, for example) (Reveley et al., 1982; Suddath et al.,
1989). Epidemiological studies of the impact of both genetic loading and early
brain damage (by evaluating the family history of psychosis and perinatal
records) will be valuable in determining the extent to which these risk factors
act independently or in concert. A recent study of this type from Sweden

Schizophrenia

(McNeil et al., 1993) found that head circumference was smaller in relation to
body length in preschizophrenic infants than in controls. Small head size was
associated with an absence of a family history of psychosis, suggesting a nongenetic cause, but was not related to season of birth or obstetric complications:
thus, links to viral infection or birth trauma were not established.
Abnormalities of brain function in schizophrenia have also been described
(Bloom, 1993). Some researchers have detected a "sensory gating" abnormality in the limbic system. Using computerized averaging of multiple electroencephalograph tracings (evoked potentials), Freedman et al. (1991) measured
differences between people from the general population, people with schizophrenia and their relatives in their response to repeated auditory and visual
stimuli. The research showed that most schizophrenic patients, as well as half of
their close relatives, were limited in their ability to screen out irrelevant
information. Thus, the capacity to discriminate stimuli and to focus attention
may be disrupted in those who are vulnerable to schizophrenia. Given sufficient
stress, the affected individual may become aroused and hypervigilant or, as a
defensive manoeuvre, withdrawn and autistic (Freedman et al., 1991).
The evidence that half of the first-degree relatives of schizophrenics share a
neurophysiological abnormality with schizophrenics themselves suggests that
the defect is genetically transmitted. The most recent work indicates that
abnormal sensory gating in schizophrenia is linked to the gene that controls the
function of brain nicotine receptors (Adler et al., 1992). This raises another
question, however: why do only some of those with the defect develop
schizophrenia? Recent research using magnetic resonance imaging reveals that
in schizophrenics the hippocampus (part of the limbic system) is smaller than in
healthy siblings who have the same sensory gating abnormality. It is possible
that early damage to the hippocampus, combined with an inherited sensory
gating defect, is sufficient to produce schizophrenia (Freedman et al., 1991).
Measures of sensory gating (and, similarly, smooth-pursuit eye-movement
abnormalities) may become increasingly valuable in tracing relatives of
schizophrenics who are vulnerable to the illness.
More advanced brain-imaging techniques are uncovering an increasingly
complex picture of functional abnormalities in schizophrenia. Research using
radioactive tracer substances and positron emission tomography (PET) has
demonstrated that blood flow through the frontal lobes of the brain does not
increase in schizophrenic patients, as it does in other people, when they
undertake tasks requiring attention and effort. People with schizophrenia may
not be able to "turn on" a specific region of their frontal lobes, the prefrontal
cortex, when needed-a problem that could explain the withdrawal, apathy
and cognitive problems in schizophrenia (Franzen & Ingvar, 1975; Weinberger & Kleinman, 1986). The prefrontal cortex and the limbic system are
linked: an abnormality in one could affect the other, though it is not certain
which area is primarily disturbed (Weinberger & Kleinman, 1986). Drawing
on the results of recent magnetic resonance imaging studies, Carpenter &
Buchanan (1994) conclude that "limbic-system circuitry is involved in the

I

l

l

i

~

3. Epidemolo~of schizophrenia

pathophysiology of psychosis, and the dorsolateral prefrontal cortical circuitry
in the pathophysiology of enduring negative symptoms".
Step by step, links are being forged between inheritance patterns, neurophysiological and anatomical abnormalities, environmental stress and the
symptoms of schizophrenia. Epidemiological research that aims to tease out
answers to questions of etiology must consider multiple factors-for example,
gender, family history, possible genetic markers such as sensory gating deficits
and smooth-pursuit eye-movement abnormalities, evidence of brain damage,
attention difficulties, predominance of negative symptoms, and perinatal
complications. An example of research that weighs the impact of several of
these factors is the study by Sacchetti et al. (1992), cited in section 3.2.6, which
evaluated the interactions of ventricular enlargement, season of birth, and
family history for psychosis in patients with both schizophrenia and affective
disorders.

3.6.2 Studies of high-risk groups
Schizophrenia is not a common disorder: consequently, it is expensive to study
precursors of the illness in randomly selected community samples, since a large
number of individuals are needed for meaningful statistical analyses to be done.
For this reason, some prospective studies use "high-risk samples" in which
children at increased risk of developing schizophrenia are identified before the
onset of the disorder and are assessed over time. One goal of such research is to
separate the antecedents of the disorder from its secondary deficits. These
studies also provide an opportunity to investigate biological markers for genetic
vulnerability to schizophrenia. In most cases, the offspring of people who suffer
from schizophrenia are selected as subjects. A Danish project (Mednick et al.,
1987), which started in 1962, examined 207 adolescents with schizophrenic
mothers, and a group of control subjects. Another project was launched in New
York, in 1971, by Erlenmeyer-Kimling & Cornblatt (1987a): they evaluated
355 children, aged 7-12 years, who were born to schizophrenic mothers, other
hospitalized psychiatric patients or normal controls.
Asarnow (1988) reviewed 24 studies of high-risk groups and concluded that
some high-risk children can be distinguished on the hasis of neurointegrative
problems, social impairment and early symptomatology. Such impairments
generally become apparent in middle childhood and adolescence. Although
some deficits are not specific for schizophrenia, deficits in attention and
information processing, in neuromotor functions (particularly smooth-pursuit
eye-movement), and in social behaviour may be specifically associated with
increased risk for schizophrenia. In addition, some family attributes, including
family communication deviance, negative affective style and a high level of
criticism and intrusiveness (expressed emotion) are associated with a higher risk
of schizophrenia. It is unclear, however, if these family attributes increase the
risk of the illness or are merely a secondary response to premorbid problems of
the pre-schizophrenic offspring.

Temporal trends

Some diseases are provoked by affluence and tend to grow with industrial
progress: others are a response to poverty and tend to decrease in incidence with
the advance of industrialization. A number of diseases associated with industrialization, however, are influenced both by affluence and poverty, and the
incidence has been found to rise early in the process of development and to fall
later. Like schizophrenia in China (Province of Taiwan) (see section 3.2.7),
they are initially more common among the rich and, later, become more
common among the poor. Such diseases include thyrotoxicosis, peptic ulcer,
poliomyelitis, appendicitis and ischaemic heart disease (Barker, 1989). The
reasons for the rise and fall in incidence vary from condition to condition but
are often related to an environmental change in hygiene or diet which acts in
childhood to modify the susceptibility of the individual, or to a particular factor
exerting an effect later in life to produce illness. For example, people whose
dietary iodine is deficient in youth are less able to adapt to an increase in iodine
intake later in life and tend to develop thyrotoxicosis (Barker & Phillips, 1984).
Kraepelin, in 1926, described such a pattern of changing occurrence for
general paralysis of the insane, pointing out that it "was formerly uncommon,
underwent a progressively rapid increase from the beginning of the last century
and for some time now has been gradually diminishing". A similar pattern for
schizophrenia has been proposed by various researchers.

4.1 Was schizophrenia rare before the eighteenth century?
Torrey (1980) has suggested that schizophrenia may not have existed prior to
the eighteenth century. This hypothesis has been rejected by a number of
authors (Jeste et al., 1985; Ellard, 1987).Jeste cited evidence, for example, that
the inhabitants of ancient India and Rome distinguished schizophrenia-like
conditions from those resembling mania, depression, catatonic stupor and
delirium. A more complex issue, however, is whether schizophrenia was less
common before the eighteenth century.
Hare (1983) argued that there was a real increase in the occurrence of
schizophrenia in the United Kingdom during the nineteenth century. Not only
did the total number of people in asylums increase, but so did admission and
first-admission rates. First admissions more than tripled between 1869 and
1900.As an editorial in the London Times of 1877 quipped, "iflunacy continues
to increase as at present, the insane will be in the majority, and, freeing

4. Temporal trends
l
1

I
I

l
1

themselves, will put the sane in asylums" (Scull, 1979). Many of the asylum
superintendents, caught, as it seemed, in an upward spiral of lunacy, were at
pains to point out that this trend reflected increasing recognition of those in
need of treatment, and was not an indictment of their attempts at prevention.
Others, like Daniel Hack Tuke (1894), believed that there was an actual
increase in mental disorder brought about by the spread of poverty. Hare
(1983), following Tuke, argued that increased recognition of insanity cannot
explain a sustained growth rate on such a scale over several decades. If
increasing numbers of mild cases were being admitted to the asylums, he
contended, one would expect to find decreasing death rates and increasing
recovery rates, and this was not the case. Hare pointed out, moreover, that the
greatest increase was in "melancholia", the condition that most closely matches
the modern diagnosis of schizophrenia.
In a recent article, Hare (1988b) further developed the "recency hypothesis", arguing that the early-onset type of schizophrenia increased during the
nineteenth century, accounting, at least in part, for the increase in diagnosed
insanity. He suggested that some biological event (e.g., a viral mutation or a
changed immunological reaction to existing infections) caused an increase in
schizophrenia around 1800. In Hare's opinion, the recency hypothesis "provides a straightforward and consistent explanation for all the major aspects of
the history and epidemiology of schizophrenia" (Hare, 1988b).
Even at the end of the nineteenth century, schizophrenia appears to have
been relatively rare. Jablensky (1986) reported that only 9.1% of men and
7.3% of women, on first admission to the University Psychiatric Clinic in
Munich in 1908, were diagnosed as suffering from dementia praecox. Since
Kraepelin himself evaluated some of these cases, it is unlikely that missed
diagnosis accounts for the low prevalence of the disorder among those
admitted. The occurrence rate for the diagnostic categories most likely to have
included schizophrenia was low among other nineteenth century asylum
populations, Jablensky argues. The greatest increase in institutionalized cases
of schizophrenia, he suggests, may well have occurred in the present century.
Some authors have pushed the study of this issue back to earlier times. In
reviewing the treatment records of the English mediaeval physician, Richard
Napier, Ellard (1987) concluded that the condition closest to our modern
category of schizophrenia, namely "mopishness", was not a common condition.
Though interesting, quantitative speculation based on such ancient records is
crude at best.
The interpretation of historical prevalence data, moreover, faces the same
difficulties as does the debate on the prevalence of schizophrenia in the presentday developing world. The low recorded rates, in each instance, may be a result
of restricted access to treatment, high mortality, or rapid recovery of affected
individuals. Although the prevalence of schizophrenia in developing societies
appears to be lower than in the industrial world, the incidence of the disease is
not. This observation suggests that we should exercise a similar degree of
caution in evaluating historical treatment prevalence rates, since they may
bear little relation to the actual occurrence of mental disorders.

Schizophrenia

4.2 Is the incidence of schizophrenia on the decline?
Der et al. (1990) have pointed out that the incidence of schizophrenia, as
determined in several recent studies, appears to be on the decline. Studies that
have examined changes in the incidence of schizophrenia since 1960 are listed
in Table 7. The studies upon which Der and associates based their opinion are
included in this table, as well as a number of other studies, some of which have
appeared since the publication of their paper, that show no change or an
increase in incidence. More than two-thirds of the studies listed in Table 7
indicate a decrease in the incidence of the illness since 1960. All of the studies
relied upon service-contact data, either first-contact or first-admission, and the
figures are age-standardized in only a few instances. A recent study found a
decrease in the occurrence of schizophrenia in those born after 1940. Waddington & Youssef (1994) demonstrated that the morbid risk for men born
between 1940 and 1969 in a small area of Ireland was 19% lower than the risk
for men born between 1920 and 1939. The morbid risk for women decreased by
56% over the same time period.
It is possible that a diagnostic shift from schizophrenia to another diagnostic category could account for a decrease in the observed occurrence of
schizophrenia (Stromgren, 1987; Crow, 1990). The switch between editions of
the International Classification of Diseases, for example, may have narrowed
the diagnosis of schizophrenia. The major ICD diagnostic shift took place in the
late 1960s, but Gupta & Murray (1991) argue that the decrease in the
incidence of schizophrenia began somewhat earlier, in the mid-1960s, in
England and Scotland. Parker et al. (1985) found that the decrease in the
incidence of treated schizophrenia in New South Wales, Australia, was
accompanied by an increase in the diagnosis of affective psychosis following the
introduction of lithium carbonate. Other studies (Dickson & Kendell, 1986;
Eagles et al., 1988) have shown a similar increase in the prevalence of affective
psychoses, though many have not.
A recent study by Kendell et al. (1993) strengthens the argument that the
changing incidence of schizophrenia is an artefact, produced by a diagnostic
shift. In a detailed study of the diagnoses attributed to a 50% sample of first
admissions to psychiatric facilities in and around Edinburgh, Scotland, the
researchers showed that the proportion diagnosed as schizophrenic by hospital
psychiatrists decreased by 22% between 1971 and 1989. When diagnoses for
these patients were made according to a computer algorithm, however, there
was no such decline; in fact there was a small increase in the proportion
diagnosed as having schizophrenia.
A comparison of diagnostic practices and longitudinal trends in the
incidence of schizophrenia in France and the United Kingdom between 1973
and 1982 leads to the conclusion that diagnostic drift has occurred in opposite
directions in the two countries producing a diverging incidence of the disease.
In the United Kingdom, an increase in the use of standardized criteria may
have led to an increase in the category of "other psychoses" and a decrease in
schizophrenia. In France, the influence of Jacques Lacan and other psycho-

Table 7
Trends in the incidence of schizophrenia since 1960
Authors

Country or area

Eagles & Whalley
(1985)

Scotland

Parker et al. (1985)

New South Wales,
Australia
Scotland

Dickson & Kendell
(1986)
Hafner & an der
Heiden (1986)
Munk-Jerrgensen
(1986)
Munk-Jerrgensen &
Jerrgensen (1986)
Joyce (1987)

Mannheim, Fed.
Rep. of Germany
Denmark

Period

Measure

Change in frequency

Age-standardized
first-admission
rate
Number of first
admissions
Number of first
admissions
First-contact rates

40% decrease

37% decrease

Eagles et al. (1988)

Aberdeen, UK

de Alarcon et al.
(1990)

Oxford, UK

Der et al. (1990)

UK

Age-standardized
first-admission rates
Age-standardized
first-admission rates
Number of first
admissions
Age-standardized firstcontact rates
Age-standardized firstcontact rates
Age-standardized
first-ever diagnosis rate
First-admission rates

FolnegoviC et al.
(1990)
Bamrah et al. (1991)

Croatia

First-admission rates

Salford, UK

Castle et al. (1991)

Camberwell. UK

Age-standardized firstcontact rates
Age-standardized firstcontact rates

Harrison et al. (1991)

Nottingham, UK

Munk-Jerrgensen &
Mortensen (1992)
Geddes et al.
(1993)

Denmark

Denmark
New Zealand

Scotland

Age-specific first-contact
rates
First-ever admission rates
First-ever admission
rates

9% decrease
48% decrease
18% increase

44% decrease (female)
37% decrease
54% decrease
50% decrease (males &
females)

40% decrease (males)
50% decrease (females)
No change
64% increase
25% increase (ICD)
40% increase (RDC)
38% increase (DSM-Ill)
No change
50% decrease
57% decrease (males)
43% decrease (females)

analysts-produced a broadening of the concept of schizophrenia and an increase
in diagnosed cases (van OS et al., 1993).
Problems surround the definition of "first admission" used in many studies
because the diagnosis at the time of first contact or admission may change
subsequently. In Denmark, only 50% of those eventually diagnosed as suffering
from schizophrenia receive such a diagnosis at the time of their first admission.
De Alarcon et al. (1 990), however, found that the incidence of schizophrenia
could be shown to have decreased in Oxford, England, for both first and
subsequent diagnoses. Munk-Jsrgensen ( 1987a, 1987b), similarly, determined
that a decline in first-admission rates had occurred even when this factor was
taken into account.
A substantial shift away from hospital treatment and towards community
care has occurred since 1960 in many countries and this change may have
resulted in fewer cases being included in traditional treatment-based statistics
(Crow, 1990; Munk-Jsrgensen & Mortensen, 1992). Some people with
schizophrenia may never be admitted to hospital. It is of interest, therefore,
that some estimates based on first contact with any type of psychiatric facility
(as opposed to first hospital admission) also show a significant decrease in the
incidence of schizophrenia (Eagles et al., 1988; de Alarcon et al., 1990; Kendell
et al., 1993). Other first-contact-based studies, however, do not show such a
decrease (Hafner & an der Heiden, 1986; Bamrah et al., 1991; Castle et al.,
1991; Harrison et al., 1991).
I t is likely that the increased use of antipsychotic drugs has led to a greater
number of patients being treated successfully by general practitioners and,
consequently, never being referred to any type of psychiatric treatment agency
or included in service-based statistics (Graham, 1990; de Alarcon et al., 1990).
Similarly, more psychotic people may escape any kind of treatment and,
instead, live in seclusion as vagrants, in shelters for the homeless, or in jail. An
incidence study of schizophrenia in Nottingham, England (Cooper et al.,
1987), for instance, found that 10% of the cases that were ultimately detected
were missed in the original screening as they were only fleetingly in contact with
the treatment facilities. Further cases with no contact at all with the formal
psychiatric treatment system (who may have seen a general practitioner, for
example) would have escaped detection altogether. The size of the population
that remains undetected and the extent to which it may have increased in
recent years is not known, but could be considerable.
Migration and changes in the age structure of the population could account
for changes in the incidence of schizophrenia. Several of the studies indicating a
decrease in incidence, however, use age-standardized statistics, and a number
use statistics for an entire country or region, which makes an effect of migration
unlikely. On the other hand, an apparent increase in the incidence of
schizophrenia in Camberwell, England, has been attributed to migration.
Afro-Caribbean residents of Camberwell show rates of schizophrenia six times
that of other ethnic groups and, it is argued, the increase in the proportion of
this immigrant population in the area may account for the high local rate of the
illness (Castle et al., 1991). The same argument could be used to explain

4. Temporal trends

the stable or increasng schizophrenia rates in Nottingham and Salford,
England.
The recent findings of decreasing admission rates for schizophrenia since the
1960s are thrown into doubt by long-term studies, presenting data that do not
indicate a decreasing trend. Hafner (1987) reviewed nine studies, which
reported changes in the morbid risk of schizophrenia over periods ranging from
38 to 130 years. Among the nine studies, three, using data from two countries,
were methodologically more sophisticated and deserve special attention. Using
the Norwegian National Case Register, Odegaard (197 1) investigated all first
admissions for schizophrenia over a period of 40 years, later extended to 63
years by Astrup (1982), and found that the rates varied little, ranging from an
initial value of 0.1810.19 per 1000 (malelfemale) in 1916 to a final value of
0.2010.25 per 1000 in 1978. Krupinski & Alexander (1983) studied all admissions for schizophrenia to the psychiatric hospitals of the State of Victoria,
Australia, over 130 years (1848-1978). They checked the diagnoses given by
retrospectively applying DSM-I11 criteria to randomly selected samples of
patients, each consisting of 100 admissions in successive periods of time. They
found a fairly stable age-corrected admission rate for schizophrenia.
Other reviews conclude that the case for the declining incidence of
schizophrenia is so far unproved, but merits further investigation (Castle, 1993;
Harrison & Mason, 1993; Jablensky, 1993). If there is, in fact, any true
decrease in the incidence of schizophrenia, the finding could be of considerable
etiological significance. Possible explanations for the phenomenon include a
decrease in the fertility of people with schizophrenia, a reduction in social or
economic stress, a change in the herd immunity to a causative infectious agent,
and a decrease in neurodevelopmental risk factors resulting from improvements
in obstetric care.
To produce a decrease in the incidence of schizophrenia throughout the
1970s, it would be necessary for a change in the fertility of schizophrenics to
have occurred through the 1950s. With the decrease in the use of hospital
confinement for the mentally ill, however, a movement that began in many
countries in the mid-1950s, it is probable that the trend has been more towards
increased fertility in schizophrenics, rather than a decrease. The fertility of
schizophrenic patients, moreover, is unlikely to play a large part in the
observed decline in the incidence of the illness because, as noted above, only
11% of people with schizophrenia have a schizophrenic parent.
As mentioned above, the early stages of industrialization may produce high
levels of employment-related stress which afflicts first the better-off groups and
later the lower classes. In the modern late-industrial societies in which the
decline in the incidence of schizophrenia is being noted, however-Australia,
Denmark and the United Kingdom-unemployment and poverty are not on
the decline. It is difficult, therefore, to see how economic and social trends can
have led to a decline in illness rates.
Increased rates of immunization and improvements in hygiene have
produced changes in herd immunity to various infectious agents. Poliomyelitis,
for example, increased in prevalence with industrialization as a result of

Schizophrenia

changes in immunity. In this instance, vulnerability of the central nervous
system to poliovirus infection increases with age. As hygiene and sanitation
improved, the proportion of children escaping infection during the relatively
safe period of infancy increased, and the number of cases of paralytic disease
rose in parallel, affecting the higher socioeconomic groups first (Barker, 1989).
The prevalence of poliomyelitis subsequently declined in developed countries
as a result of immunization programmes. Similar changes in immunity or
exposure to viral infection might account for the reported changes in the
prevalence of schizophrenia over time and within social groups.
Developments in obstetric practice may similarly account for the observed
changes in the incidence of schizophrenia. The relative risk of schizophrenia in
people with obstetric complications compared with those without has been
estimated to be 2.5: 1 (Goodman, 1988). The decline in early neonatal
mortality rates in England and Wales was paralleled by the subsequent fall in
the first-admission rate for schizophrenia in the 1960s and 1970s (Gupta &
Murray, 1991).
Obstetric factors could explain why decreases in the incidence of schizophrenia in the United Kingdom have been greatest in the most prosperous
regions (Gupta & Murray, 1991), why the districts that show no decrease in
schizophrenia have large immigrant populations with high rates of poverty
(Eagles, 1991b), and why schizophrenia rates in developed countries are higher
among the poor. Afro-Caribbean infants in the United Kingdom (Terry et al.,
1987; Griffiths et al., 1989) and black infants in the United States of America
(North & MacDonald, 1977) are more likely to be oflow birth weight, but have
higher survival rates than white infants of low birth weight. Since some studies
have found that schizophrenic patients tend to have lower birth weights than
their healthy siblings (Lane & Albee, 1966; Stabenau & Pollin, 1967), it is
possible that intrauterine development and survival may contribute to the high
risk of schizophrenia in lower social groups and among immigrants.

4.3 Changes in the clinical picture of schizophrenia
Although there is controversy over the question of a decline in the incidence of
schizophrenia, most authors agree that a substantial change has occurred in the
clinical picture of the illness in the course of this century, with a marked
decrease in the occurrence of catatonic schizophrenia in developed countries
(Leff, 1988). A similar decline has not been seen in most developing countries,
particularly in Africa, where catatonic forms of schizophrenia are still quite
common (Odejide et al., 1989). The proportion of hebephrenic cases has also
decreased in developed countries, whereas the number of paranoid and
undifferentiated cases has increased (Hare, 1988a).
Bleuler (1968) suggested that the proportion of schizophrenic patients who
recover had not significantly increased since the early years of the twentieth
century. He observed, however, that the number of "catastrophic" and chronic
cases of schizophrenia had decreased, and milder forms of the disease had

4. Temporal trends

increased, as a result of the reduction in mishandling and neglect of hospitalized
patients that was common earlier in the century. Shepherd et al. (1989)
concluded, from their review of twentieth-century outcome studies in schizophrenia, that there had been a substantial improvement in recovery rates since
the 1950s. Warner's (1985) more comprehensive review, however, did not
confirm this impression: the data indicated that recovery rates had scarcely
improved since the early years of the century, though they showed a substantial
decline in the 1920s and 1930s.

Conclusions and recommendations for
future studies
5.1 Methodological issues
Methodological problems, especially lack of standardization of diagnostic
criteria, seriously limit the comparability of results reported by different
researchers and observed in different societies. In the absence of external
validating criteria, schizophrenia remains a clinical concept, and the sampling
of cases cannot be guided by anything better than a carefully evaluated
knowledge base shared by the greatest possible number of investigators. In this
regard, the forthcoming introduction of ICD-l0 will represent a step forward in
the adoption of uniform, specific diagnostic and descriptive criteria to be used
in epidemiological research.
The sample requirements necessary to detect an adequate number of cases
in epidemiological research also present methodological difficulties. For schizophrenia-an illness with a relatively low incidencethe multicentre collaborative research approach has advantages over single-centre studies and is more
likely to add significantly to epidemiological and clinical knowledge. Large
numbers ofcases can be accumulated in a relatively short time, and the samples
at the different sites allow establishment of robust characteristics of the disorder
that are constant across cultures and in populations with different demographic, ecological and biological characteristics.

5.2 High-risk studies
Collaborative studies of people at high risk for schizophrenia could be
particularly fruitful. The small samples in the high-risk studies conducted to
date and the lack of operationalized diagnostic criteria have been obstacles to
achieving significant results. The solution to these problems, together with a
focus on promising areas of research, such as attention or information
processing markers and smooth-pursuit eye movement, may provide a better
understanding of the etiology of schizophrenia (see section 3.6). The ultimate
goal of such research would be to find preventive measures or early interventions for those at high risk of developing the disorder (Erlenmeyer-Kimling
& Cornblatt, 1987b).

5. Conclusions and recommendations

5.3 Geographical stability of incidence
Important new epidemiological data on schizophrenia have been derived from
the WHO Study on the Determinants of Outcome of Severe Mental Disorders
(Jablensky et al., 1992), which employed a multisite collaborative methodology. The study revealed that incidence rates of schizophrenia, at various
levels of definition, are similar across countries: this is especially true for the
most restricted definition-the CATEGO S class. Even the rates for the most
broadly defined diagnostic category (CATEGO S,P,O) varied between centres
by a factor of no more than 2.6. The extent to which this degree of variation is
seen as important is a matter of perspective. For health administrators, the
differences in occurrence of broadly defined schizophrenia may be important
for the delivery of health care: for researchers exploring the etiology of the
disorders, the similarity of incidence rates at the CATEGO S + level is an
important finding. It is clear, however, that the incidence found in the study
was much more stable than earlier research with less standardized diagnostic
procedures would have led us to expect.
The absence of marked variation in the incidence of schizophrenia does not
lend itself to easy interpretation, in the absence of an understanding of the
relationship between the schizophrenic phenotype and the underlying causes
and pathophysiology of the disorder. "If schizophrenia is not a single disease of
uniform aetiology and pathophysiology, but rather a 'final common pathway'
for a variety of pathological processes and developmental anomalies-some
with strong genetic contribution and some resulting primarily from environmental factors-then the relatively invariant rate of its occurrence could be the
expression of a similarly distributed liability for a schizophrenic type of response
to different causes rather than a reflection of a similar distribution of an
identical primary cause" (Jablensky, 1989). A "nuclear" schizophrenic syndrome (CATEGO S in the Determinants of Outcome study), with its clinical
consistency and uniform occurrence, may be a manifestation of a more complex
genotype with a much wider range of phenotypical expression.

+

+

5.4 Temporal changes in incidence
The issue of whether the incidence of schizophrenia is on the decline or not is a
matter of considerable interest and importance. To date, all of the attempts to
arrive at an answer to this question have used treatment-related statistics.
However, these approaches are unlikely to yield a definitive solution, since the
rates are susceptible to variation with changing diagnostic practices and
patterns of institutional care. A field survey with a comprehensive sampling
strategy is required. For example, it would be productive to repeat the
incidence survey of the multisite Determinants of Outcome study ten years or
more after drawing the original sample.

Schizophrenia

5.5 Sex differences
Differences in schizophrenia between males and females may prove to be a
productive area of research. The consistent finding of an earlier age of onset
arnong men, together with data showing differences in course and outcome,
premorbid functioning, phenomenology, familial risk and brain structure,
point to the value of sex differences in establishing subtypes of schizophrenia.
"The advantage of using gender as the subdividing variable by which to look
for heterogeneity is that it is completely reliable, stable and valid in its
definition" (Lewis et al., 1992). It is unlikely, however, that all the sexually
dimorphic features of schizophrenia can be explained on the basis of a single
model. It will be important in future studies to avoid potential sources of
sampling bias that may account for inconsistent findings. Walker & Lewine
(1993), for example, have stressed the importance of reporting the sex ratio of
the population from which the sample is drawn and the sex ratio of the studied
sample.

5.6 Social class and urbanization
Recent data make it clear that social drift alone cannot explain the social-class
gradient for schizophrenia or the high prevalence of the disorder in cities (see
sections 3.2.7 and 3.2.8). Epidemiological research is required to establish the
mediating factors that lead to the greater occurrence of schizophrenia in the
lower socioeconomic groups and in urban areas. Besides social drift, such
factors may include viral infections, obstetric complications, nutrition, head
trauma, stressful life events and work conditions. Link et al. (1986) have shown
a relationship between harsh work conditions and the development of schizophrenia in New York City. Similar research to evaluate relationships between
the various risk factors and the onset of schizophrenia in rural and urban
settings may help to show whether the path to illness is the same in the two types
of environment.

5.7 Immigrant status
The observation of increased rates of schizophrenia among Afro-Caribbeans in
the United Kingdom and the evidence that the risk for the illness appears
substantially greater in second-generation immigrants (see section 3.2.8) raise
issues that warrant further investigation. The increased risk in secondgeneration immigrants may be due to (a) obstetric complications secondary to
changes in maternal nutrition, (b) improved fetal survival resulting from better
perinatal care, (c) a greater risk of intrauterine or neonatal viral infection, and
(d) psychosocial stresses such as family disintegration, homelessness and
deprivation (Jablensky, 1993; Warner, 1994). Studies of Afro-Caribbean
patients and controls examining obstetric and neonatal history, season of birth,

5. Conclusions and recommendations

and social factors would yield useful information. Comparative studies in the
United Kingdom and the West Indies would reveal whether schizophrenia
rates are higher in immigrants than in residents of the country of origin.

5.8 CO-occurring illnesses
The investigation of genetic linkage in schizophrenia may be advanced by
studies of illnesses that CO-occur with schizophrenia with an increased or
decreased incidence. The low rate of occurrence of cancer of the colon and lung
in schizophrenic patients (Masterson & O'Shea, 1984; Gulbinat et al., 1992)
raises the possibility that a gene that increases the vulnerability to schizophrenia is linked to a cancer-suppressing gene. A large-scale epidemiological
survey of cancer risk in schizophrenic patients, their first-degree relatives and
the general population could be of considerable interest. A reduced risk for
certain carcinomas in the mothers, siblings and children of schizophrenic
patients would constitute evidence of a genetic linkage.

5.9 Categorical versus continuous models

I

Schizophrenia may be conceived of as a distinct syndrome, categorically
different from other conditions (the dichotomous/categorical model), or as a
vulnerability distributed along a continuum (the continuous/dimensional
model). Hafner (1988) observed that most schizophrenic features that appear
to be invariable across cultures, such as lack of insight, suspiciousness,
delusional mood, ideas of reference, delusions of persecution, and flatness of
affect, are dimensional in nature. Further support for the dimensional model
comes from psychometric and neurophysiological studies (for example, the
reaction-time cross-over phenomenon, retarded modality shift and smoothpursuit eye movement), in which a distribution along a continuous range of
abnormalities is observed.
Hafner (1988) suggested that the model of schizophrenia as a "natural
disease entity", as first conceived by Kraepelin in 1896, presents difficulties in
interpreting the new epidemiological findings. In searching for the causes of
schizophrenia, continuous models, as favoured by Kraepelin in his later years,
appear more plausible. Hafner points out that three types of evidence support
the continuous model of schizophrenia:
1. the onset of the disorder is often preceded by social and cognitive deficits, by
mild schizophrenia-like symptoms, or subclinical speech and thought
disorders and emotional instability;
2. in the genetic environment of people with schizophrenia, it is possible to find
an increased rate of schizoid, paranoid, and eccentric and odd personalities,
and also higher rates of other psychiatric disturbances;
3. the studies that have attempted to identify biological trait variables and
vulnerability markers have so far produced unimodal continuous patterns of
distribution between schizophrenics and their relatives.

Schizophrenia

5.10 Social and biological risk factors
Hafner (1990) concluded that "after almost a century of schizophrenia research
a strikingly large number of questions on the causes or risk factors specific for
premorbid characteristics and on factors determining the onset and course of
psychotic episodes and other aspects of the disease, such as social and cognitive
deficits, remain unresolved." Genetic factors are clearly important in the
development of schizophrenia, but they are not sufficient to explain the entire
pattern of occurrence: for example, monozygotic twins are concordant for
schizophrenia in only about half of the instances. Neurodevelopmental factors,
such as birth injury and maternal infection during gestation, appear to be
relevant to the development of the disorder but the influence of these factors has
not yet been well defined. Around the world, social class and caste have a
complex relationship with the occurrence of schizophrenia, probably reflecting,
in different instances, neurodevelopmental effects, social causation and social
drift. Social stress, in the form of stressful life events, forms part of the pool of
causal factors that affect the onset of the disorder.
The substantially better outcome for schizophrenic patients in developing
countries (WHO, 1979; Jablensky et al., 1992) has not yet been satisfactorily
explained. Some have argued that the course of the illness is affected by the
patterns of utilization of labour in different parts of the world and the greater
ease with which a person recovering from a psychotic disorder can return to
work in a subsistence economy (Warner, 1985). Although, as some argue,
epidemiological knowledge may not support sociocultural models of the e t i o l o ~
of schizophrenia (Hafner, 1987), the social environment may be of substantially
greater importance in shaping the ultimate course and outcome of the
condition. The relationship of the family environment to the course of
schizophrenia, for example, has proven to be a productive area of research
(Kavanagh, 1992). Further research on the effect of sociocultural variables,
especially work, on the course of schizophrenia is clearly needed.

References

Aarachau BM et al. (1972) A checklist for the diagnosis of schizophrenia. British journal
of psychiatry, 12 1: 529-539.
Abrams R, Taylor M (1973) First-rank symptoms, severity of illness, and treatment
response in schizophrenia. Comprehensive psychiatry, 14: 353-355.
Adams W et al. (1993) Epidemiological evidence that maternal influenza contributes to
the aetiology of schizophrenia: an analysis of Scottish, English and Danish data.
Britishjournal of psychiatry, 163: 522-534.
Adelstein AM et al. (1968) The epidemiology of schizophrenia in an English city. Social
psychiatry, 3: 47-53.
Adler LE et al. (1992) Normalization by nicotine of deficient auditory sensory gating in
the relatives of schizophrenics. Biological psychiatry, 32: 607-616.
Akimoto H et al. (1943) Chih6 shotoshi ni okeru minseigaku-teki oyobi seishinigakuteki chosa. Seishin shinkei gaku zasshi, 47: 1-24.
Akimoto H et al. (1964) An epidemiological, genetic and social psychiatric study on
mental disorders in the isolated island of Hachijo-jima. Psychiatria et neurologia
japonica, 66: 95 1-986.
American Psychiatric Association (1980) Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental
disorders, 3rd ed. Washington, DC, American Psychiatric Press.
American Psychiatric Association (1987) Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental
disorders, 3rd ed. rev. Washington, DC, American Psychiatric Press.
American Psychiatric Association (1994) Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental
disorders, 4th ed. Washington, DC, American Psychiatric Press.
Andreasen NC, Flaum M (1991) Schizophrenia: the characteristic symptoms. Schizophrenia bulletin, 17: 27-50.
Angermeyer MC, Kuhn L (1988) Gender differences in age at onset of schizophrenia.
European archives of psychiatry and neurological science, 237: 351-364.
Angst J (1991) Is schizophrenia disappearing? European archives of psychiatry and clinical
neuroscience, 240: 373-378 (letter).
Anthony JO et al. (1985) Comparison of the lay diagnostic interview schedule and a

Schizophrenia
standardized psychiatric diagnosis: experience in eastern Baltimore. Archives of
general psychiatry, 42: 667-675.
Arai N et al. (1958) The psychiatric investigation by census in Chichi-bu District and
the comparison with another farm village. Psychiatria et neurologia japonica, 60:
475-486.
Asarnow JR (1988) Children at risk for schizophrenia: converging lines of evidence.
Schizophrenia bulletin, 14: 613-63 1.
Astrachan BM et al. (1972) A checklist for the diagnosis of schizophrenia. Britishjournal
of psychiatry, 121: 529-536.
Astrup C (1982) The increase of mental disorders. Oslo, National Case Register of Mental
disorders, Gaustad Hospital (unpublished report).
Averback P (1981) Lesions of the nucleus ansa peduncularis in neuropsychiatric
disease. Archives of neurology, 38: 230-235.
Baasher T (1961) Survey of mental illness in Wadi Halfa. Paper presented at the Sixth
International Congress on Mental Health (cited in Racy J. Psychiatry in the Arab
east. Acta psychiatrica scandinauica, 1970, 2 11 (Suppl.): 92-93).
Babigian H M (1980) Schizophrenia: epidemiology. In: Kaplan HI, Freedman AM,
Sadock BJ, eds. Comprehensive textbook ofpsychiatry, 3rd ed., vol. 2, Baltimore, Williams
& Wilkins, pp. 860-866.
Bamrah JS et al. (1991) Epidemiology in Salford, 1974-84: changes in an urban
community over ten years. British journal of psychiatry, 159: 802-8 10.
Barker DJP (1989) Rise and fall of Western diseases. Nature, 338: 371-372.
Barker DJP, Phillips DIW (1984) Current incidence of thyrotoxicosis and past
prevalence of goitre in 12 British towns. Lancet, ii: 567-570.
Barr CE et al. (1990) Exposure to influenza epidemics during gestation and adult
schizophrenia: a 40-year study. Archives of general psychiatry, 47: 869-874.
Bates CE, van Dam CH (1984) Low incidence of schizophrenia in British Columbia
coastal Indians. Journal of epidemiology and community health, 38: 127-1 30.
Bebbington PE (1987) Life events in schizophrenia: the WHO collaborative study.
Social psychiatry, 22: 179-1 80.
Beck JC (1978) Social influences on the prognosis of schizophrenia. Schizophrenia bulletin,
4: 86-101.
Beiser M, Iacono WG (1990) An update on the epidemiology ofschizophrenia. Canadian
journal of psychiatry, 35: 657-668.
Beiser M et al. (1989) Temporal stability in the major mental disorders. In: Robins LN,
Barrett JE, eds. The validity ofpsychiatric diagnosis, New York, Raven Press, pp. 77-97.

References
Ben-Tovim DI, Cushnie J M (1986) The prevalence of schizophrenia in a remote area of
Botswana. British journal of psychiatry, 148: 576-580.
Bland RC, Kolada J (1988) Diagnostic issues and current criteria for schizophrenia. In:
Tsuang MT, Simpson JC, eds, Handbook of schizophrenia. Vol. 3: Nosology, epidemiology
and genetics. Amsterdam, Elsevier, pp. 1-25.
Bland RC, Parker JH (1978) Prognosis in schizophrenia. Archives of generalpsychiatry, 35:
72-77.
Bland R C et al. (1976) Prognosis in schizophrenia: a ten-year follow-up of first
admissions. Archives of general psychiatry, 33: 949-954.
Bland R C et al. (1988) Lifetime prevalence of psychiatric disorders in Edmonton. Acta
psychiatrica scandinavica, 338 (suppl.): 24-32.
Bland R C et al. (1990) Prevalence of psychiatric disorders and suicide attempts in a
prison population. Canadian journal of psychiatry, 35: 407-413.
Blazer D et al. (1985) Psychiatric disorders. A rurallurban comparison. Archives of
general psychiatry, 42: 65 1-656.
Bleuler E (1908) Die Prognose der Dementia Praecox-Schizophreniegruppe. Allgemeine
Zeitschrift f i r Psychiatric, 65: 436-464 (translated and published in: Cutting J,
Shepherd M, eds. The clinical roots of the schizophrenic concept. Oxford, Oxford
University Press, 1987, pp. 59-74).
Bleuler M (1968) A 23-year longitudinal study of 208 schizophrenics and impressions in
regard to the nature of schizophrenia. In: Rosenthal D, Kety SS, The transmission of
schizophrenia, Oxford, Pergamon, p. 3.
Bloom FE (1993) Advancing a neurodevelopmental origin for schizophrenia. Archives of
general psychiatry, 50: 224-227.
Bojholm S, Stromgren E (1989) Prevalence of schizophrenia on the island of Bornholm
in 1935 and in 1983. Acta psychiatrica scandinavica, 348 (Suppl.): 157- 166.
Book JA (1953) A genetic and neuropsychiatric investigation of a North-Swedish
population. Acta genetica et statistics medica, 4: 1- 100.
Book JA et al. (1978) Schizophrenia in a North Swedish geographical
isolate, 1900- 1977: epidemiology, genetics and biochemistry. Clinical genetics, 14:
373-394.
Bowler AE, Torrey EF (1990) Influenza and schizophrenia: Helsinki and Edinburgh.
Archives of general psychiatry, 47: 876-877 (letter).
Bradbury T N , Miller GA (1985) Season of birth in schizophrenia: a review of evidence,
methodology and etiology. Psychological bulletin, 98: 569-594.
Breakey WR et al. (1989) Health and mental health problems of homeless men and
women in Baltimore. Journal of the American Medical Association, 262: 1352-1357.

Schizophrenia
Bremer J (1951) A social psychiatric investigation of a small community in northern
Norway. Acta psychiatrica et neurologica scandinavica, 62 (suppl.): 1- 166.
Brockington I F et al. (1978) Definitions of schizophrenia: concordance and prediction
of outcome. Psychological medicine, 8: 387-398.
Bromet E et al. (1988) Basic principles of epidemiologic research in schizophrenia. In:
Tsuang MT, Simpson JC, eds, Handbook ofschizophrenia. Vol. 3: Nosology, epidemiology
and genetics. Amsterdam, Elsevier, pp. 151- 168.
Brown GW, Birley JLT (1968) Crises and life changes and the onset of schizophrenia.
Journal of health and social behaviour, 9: 203-214.
Bruce ML et al. (1991) Poverty and psychiatric status. Archives of general psychiatry, 48:
470-474.
Brugger C (1931) Versuch einer Geisteskrankenzahlung in Thiiringen. Zeitschrift fur die
gesamte Neurologie und Psychiatrie, 133: 252-290.
Brugger C (1933) Psychiatrische Ergebnisse einer medizinischen, anthropologischen
und soziologischen Bevolkerungsuntersuchung. Zeitschrift f i r die gesamte Neurologie
und Psychiatrie, 146: 489-524.
Brugger C (1938) Psychiatrische Bestandesaufnahme im Gebiet eines medizinischanthropologischen Zensus in der Nahe von Rosenheim. aitschrift fur die gesamte
Neurologie und Psychiatrie, 160: 189-207.
Burnam MA et al. (1987) Six month prevalence of specific psychiatric disorders among
Mexican Americans and non-Hispanic whites in Los Angeles. Archives of general
psychiatry, 44: 687-694.
Cabot M R (1990) The incidence and prevalence of schizophrenia in the Republic of
Ireland. Social psychiatry and psychiatric epidemiology, 25: 2 10-2 15.
Cade J F J , Krupinski J (1962) Incidence of psychiatric disorders in Victoria in relation
to country of birth. Medical journal of Australia, 49: 400-404.
Canino GJ et al. (1987) The prevalence of specific psychiatric disorders in Puerto Rico.
Archives of general psychiatry, 44: 727-735.
Carpenter WT, Buchanan R W (1994) Schizophrenia. New England journal of medicine,
330: 68 1-690.
Carpenter W T Jr, Strauss JS (1973) Are there pathognomonic symptoms in schizophrenia? An empirical investigation of ~chneider'sfirst-rank symptoms. Archives of
general psychiatry, 28: 847-852.
Carpenter W T J r , Strauss JS (1974) Cross-cultural evaluation of Schneider's first rank
symptoms of schizophrenia: a report from the international pilot study of schizophrenia. American journal of psychiatry, 131: 682-687.
Carstairs GM, Kapur R L (1976) The great universe of Kota: a study of stress, change, and
mental disorder in an Indian village. Berkeley, University of California Press.

Casey PR et al. (1984) The diagnostic status of patients with conspicuous psychiatric
morbidity in primary care. Psychological medicine, 14: 673-681.
Castle DJ (1993) Some current controversies in the epidemiology of schizophrenia.
Current medical literature, psychiatry, 4 ( 1) : 3-7.
Castle D et al. (1991) The incidence of operationally defined schizophrenia in
Camberwell, 1965-84. Britishjournal of psychiatry, 159: 790-794.
Chandrasena R (1987) Schneider's first rank symptoms: an international and interethnic comparative study. Acta psychiatrica scandinavica, 76: 574-578.
Cheung P (1991) Adult psychiatric epidemiology in China in the 80s. Culture, medicine
andpsychiatry, 15: 479-496.
Clark RE (1949) Psychoses, income and occupational prestige. American journal of
sociology, 54: 433-440.
Cochrane R (1977) Mental illness in immigrants to England and Wales: an analysis of
mental hospital admissions, 197 1. Social psychiatry, 12: 25-35.
Cochrane R, Bal SS (1987) Migration and schizophrenia: an examination of five
hypotheses. Social psychiatry, 22: 181-191.
Cochrane R, Bal SS (1988) Ethnic density is unrelated to incidence of schizophrenia.
British journal of psychiatry, 153: 363-366.
Coid J (1984) How many psychiatric patients in prison? Britishjournal ofpsychiatry, 145:
78-86.
Cooper JE et al. (1972) Psychiatric diagnosis in New York and London. London, Oxford
University Press (Maudsley Monograph No. 20).
Cooper JE et al. (1987) The incidence of schizophrenia in Nottingham. Britishjournal of
psychiatry, 151: 619-626.
Copeland JRM et al. (1991) The epidemiology of dementia. GMS-AGESCAT studies
of prevalence and incidence, including studies in progress. European archives of
psychiatry and neurological science, 240: 2 12-2 17.
Crocetti GM et al. (1971) Selected aspects of the epidemiology of psychoses in Croatia,
Yugoslavia. 111. The cluster sample and the results of the pilot survey. American
journal of epidemiology, 94: 126- 134.
Crow TJ (1980) Molecular pathology of schizophrenia: more than one disease process?
British medical journal, 280: 66-68.
Crow TJ (1990) Trends in schizophrenia. Lancet, 335: 851 (letter).
Crow TJ, Done DJ (1992) Prenatal exposure to influenza does not cause schizophrenia.
British journal of psychiatry, 161: 390-393.
Curran JP, Cirelli VA (1988) The role ofpsychosocial factors in the etiology, course and

Schizophrenia
outcome of schizophrenia. In: Tsuang MT, Simpson JC, eds. Handbook of schizophrenia. Vol. 3: Nosology, epidemiology and genetics. Amsterdam, Elsevier, pp. 275-297.
Dahl AA et al. (1992) Convergence of American and Scandinavian diagnoses of
functional psychoses. Comprehensive psychiatry, 33: 13-16.
Dalkn P (1968) Month of birth and schizophrenia. Acta psychiatrica scandinauica, 203:
55-60.
Dalkn P (1975) Season ofbirth: a study ofschizophrenia and other mental disorders. Amsterdam,
North Holland.
Dalkn P (1990) Deviant birth season distribution: does it offer a clue to the aetiology of
schizophrenia? In: Hafner H, Gattaz WF, eds. Searchfor the causes of schizophrenia, Vol
2. Berlin, Springer-Verlag, pp. 7- 13.
Day R et a1.(1987) Stressful life events preceding the acute onset of schizophrenia: a
cross-national study from the World Health Organization. Culture, medicine and
psychiatry, 11: 123-205.
de Alarcon J et al. (1990) Trends in schizophrenia. Lancet, 335: 852-853 (letter)
de Sauvage NWJJ (1934) Verband tussen geboortemaand en schizophrene en manischdepressieve geestesziekten. Nederlandsch tijdschrift uoor geneeskunde, 79: 528.
de Sauvage NWJJ (195 1 ) Verband tussen geboortemaand en schizophrene en manischdepressieve geestesziekten. Nederlandsch tijdschrift uoor geneeskunde, 4: 3855-3864.
de Sauvage NWJJ (1954) Vitamin C and the schizophrenic syndrome. Foliapsychiatrica,
neurologica et neurochirurgica Neerlandica, 57: 347-355.
Der G et al. (1990) Is schizophrenia disappearing? Lancet, 335: 513-516.
Dickson WE, Kendell RE (1986) Does maintenance lithium therapy prevent recurrences of mania under ordinary clinical conditions? Psychological medicine, 16:
521-530.
Dilling H (1980) Psychiatric and primary health services: results of a field study. Acta
psychiatrica scandinauica, 285 (Suppl.):15-22.
Dilling H, Weyerer S (1980) Incidence and prevalence of treated mental disorders;
health care planning in a small town region of Upper Bavaria. Acta psychiatrica
scandinauica, 61: 209-222.
Dilling H, Weyerer S (1984) Prevalence of mental disorders in the small-town, rural
region of Traunstein (Upper Bavaria). Acta psychiatrica scandinauica, 69: 60-79.
Dilling H et al. (1989) The Upper Bavarian studies. Acta psychiatrica scandinauica, 348
(Suppl.): 1 13- 140.
Dohrenwend BP et al. (1987) Social and psychological risk factors for episodes of

References
schizophrenia. In: Hafner H et al., eds. Search for the causes of schizophrenia, Berlin,
Springer-Verlag, pp. 275-296.
Dohrenwend BP et al. (1992) Socioeconomic status and psychiatric disorders: the
causation-selection issue. Science, 255: 946-952.
Done DJ et al. (1991) Complications of pregnancy and delivery in relation to psychosis
in adult life: data from the British perinatal mortality survey sample. British medical
journal, 302: 1576- 1580.
Dube KC, Kumar N (1972) Epidemiological study of schizophrenia. Journal of biosocial
science, 4: 187-195.
Dunham H W (1965) Community and schizophrenia: an epidemiological analysis. Detroit,
Wayne State University Press.
Eagles JM (1991a ) Is schizophrenia disappearing? British journal of psychiatry, 158:
834-835.
Eagles J M (1991b) The relationship between schizophrenia and immigration: are there
alternatives to psychosocial models? British journal of psychiatry, 159: 783-789.
Eagles JM, Whalley LJ (1985) Decline in the diagnosis of schizophrenia among first
admissions to Scottish mental hospitals from 1969-78. British journal of psychiatry,
146: 151-154.
Eagles J M et al. (1988) Decline in the diagnosis of schizophrenia among first contacts
with psychiatric services in north-east Scotland, 1969-1984. British journal of
psychiatry, 152: 793-798.
Eagles J M et al. (1990) Obstetric complications in DSM-I11 schizophrenics and their
siblings. Lancet, 335: 1139-1 141.
Eastwell H (1975) Schizophrenic typology in Aboriginal Australia: observations from
Arnhem Land (unpublished paper cited in Torrey EF, Schizophrenia and civilization,
New York, Jason Aronson, pp. 144-145).
Eaton JW, Weil RJ (1955) Culture and mental disorders. Glencoe, Free Press.
Eaton WW (1974) Residence, social class, and schizophrenia. Journal of health and social
behauior, 15: 289-299.
Eaton W W (1975) Marital status and schizophrenia. Acta psychiatrica scandinavica, 52:
320-329.
Eaton WW (1985) Epidemiology of schizophrenia. Epidemiological reviews, 7: 105- 126.
Eaton WW (1991) Update on the epidemiology of schizophrenia. Ekidemiologic reviews,
13: 320-328.
Eaton WW et al. (1988) The use of epidemiology for risk factor research in

Schizophrenia
schizophrenia: an overview and methodologic critique. In: Tsuang MT, Simpson
JC, eds. Handbook of schizophrenia. Vol. 3: Nosology, epidemiology and genetics. Amsterdam, Elsevier, pp. 169-204.
Eaton WW et al. (1991) Screening for psychosis in the general population with a selfreport interview. Journal of nervous and mental disease, 179: 689-693.
Eaton WW et al. (1992a) Schizophrenia and rheumatoid arthritis: a review. Schizophrenia research, 6: 181- 192.
Eaton WW et al. (1992b) Long-term course of hospitalization for schizophrenia. Part I.
Risk for rehospitalization. Schizophrenia bulletin, 18: 217-228.
Egeland JA, Hostetter AM (1983) Amish study. I: Affective disorders among the
Amish, 1976-1 980. American journal of psychiatry, 140: 56-6 1.
Ellard J (1987) Did schizophrenia exist before the eighteenth century? Australia and New
zealandjournal of psychiatry, 2 1: 306-3 14.
Elnagar MN et al. (197 1) Mental health in an Indian rural community. Britishjournal of
psychiatry, 118: 499-503.
Endicott JN et al. (1982) Diagnostic criteria for schizophrenia. Archives of general
psychiatry, 39: 884-889.
Erlenmeyer-Kimling L, Cornblatt B (1987a) The New York High-Risk Project: a
follow-up report. Schizophrenia bulletin, 13: 45 1-46 1.
Erlenmeyer-Kimling L, Cornblatt B (1987b) High-risk research in schizophrenia: a
summary of what has been learned. Journal of psychiatric research, 4: 401-41 1.
Essen-Moller E (1956) Individual traits and morbidity in a Swedish rural population.
Acta psychiatrica et neurologica scandinavica, 100 (Suppl.): 1- 160.
Fananas L et al. (1989) Seasonality of birth in schizophrenia: an insufficient stratification of control population. Social psychiatry andpsychiatric epidemiology, 24: 266-270.
Faraone SV et al. (1994) Gender differences in age at onset of schizophrenia. British
journal of psychiatry, 164: 625-629.
Faris REL, Dunham H W (1939) Mental disorders in urban areas: an ecological study of
schizophrenia and other psychoses. Chicago, University of Chicago Press.
Feighner J P et al. (1972) Diagnostic criteria for use in psychiatric research. Archives of
general psychiatry, 26: 57-63.
Fenton WS et al. (1981) Diagnosis of schizophrenia: a critical review of current
diagnostic systems. Schizophrenia bulletin, 7: 452-476.
Fischer PJ, Breakey WR (1991) The epidemiology of alcohol, drug, and mental
disorders among homeless persons. American psychologist, 46: 1115-1 128.

Folnegovit Z et al. (1990) The incidence of schizophrenia in Croatia. Britishjournal of
psychiatry, 156: 363-365.
Folnegovit Z, ~olne~ovit-Smalc
V (1992) Schizophrenia in Croatia: interregional
differences in prevalence and a comment on constant incidence. Journal of epidemiology and community health, 46: 248-255.
Franzen G, Ingvar DH (1975) Abnormal distribution of cerebral activity in chronic
schizophrenia. Journal of psychiatric research, 12: 199-2 14.
Freedman R et al. (1991) Elementary neuronal dysfunctions in schizophrenia. Schizophrenia research, 4: 233-243.
Freeman H, Alpert M (1986) Prevalence of schizophrenia in an urban population.
British journal of psychiatry, 149: 603-61 1.
Fremming KH (195 1) The expectations of mental injrmity in a sample of the Danishpopulation.
London, Cassell.
Fugelli P (1975) Mental health and living conditions in a fishing community in
northern Norway. Acta psychiatrica scandinauica, 263 (Suppl.): 39-42.
Gardner EA, Babigian H M (1966) A longitudinal comparison of psychiatric service to
selected socioeconomic areas of Monroe County (New York). American journal of
orthopsychiatry, 36: 8 18-828.
Geddes JR et al. (1993) Persistence of the decline in the diagnosis of schizophrenia
among first admissions to Scottish hospitals from 1969 to 1988. British journal of
psychiatry, 163: 620-626.
Geddes J et al. (1994) Comparison of prevalence of schizophrenia among residents of
hostels for homeless people in 1966 and 1992. British medical journal, 308: 8 16-8 19.
Gerard DL, Houston LG (1953) Family setting and the social ecology of schizophrenia.
Psychiatric quarterh, 27: 90- 101.
Giel DR et a1 (1980) Over de epidemiologie van functionele psychosen en invaliditeit.
Tijdschrift uoor psychiatric, 22: 710-722.
Giggs JA, Cooper JE (1987) Ecological structure and the distribution of schizophrenia
and affective psychoses in Nottingham. British journal of psychiatry, 151: 627-633.
Glatzel J (1990) Psychiatric diagnosis in the German-speaking countries. In: Sartorius
N et al., eds. Sources and traditions of classification inpsychiatry. Bern, Hogrefe & Huber,
pp. 58-92.
Goldberg EM, Morrison SL (1963) Schizophrenia and social class. British journal of
psychiatry, 109: 785-802.
Goodman R (1988) Are complications of pregnancy and birth causes of schizophrenia?
Developmental medicine and child neurology, 30: 391-395.

Schizophrenia
Gottesman I1 (1991) Schizophrenia genesis: the origins of madness. New York, Freeman.
Gottesman 11, Shields J (1982) Schizophrenia: the epigeneticpuzzle. New York, Cambridge
University Press.
Graham PM (1990) Trends in schizophrenia. Lancet, 335: 1214 (letter)
Griffiths R et al. (1989) Ethnic differences in birth statistics from central Birmingham.
British medical journal, 298: 94-95.
Gulbinat W et al. (1992) Cancer incidence of schizophrenic patients: results of record
linkage studies in three countries. British journal of psychiatry, 161 (Suppl. 18): 75-85.
Gunderson JG, Mosher LR (1975) The cost of schizophrenia. American journal of
psychiatry, 132: 901-6.
Gunn J et al. (1978) Psychiatric aspects of imprisonment. London, Academic Press.
Gunn J et al. (1991) Treatment needs of prisoners with psychiatric disorders. British
medical journal, 303: 338-341.
Gupta S (1993) Can environmental factors explain the epidemiology of schizophrenia
in immigrant groups? Social psychiatry and psychiatric epidemiology, 28: 263-266.
Gupta S, Murray R M (1991) The changing incidence of schizophrenia: fact or artefact?
Directions in psychiatry, l l : 1-8.
Hafner H (1987) Epidemiology of schizophrenia. In: Hafner H et al., eds. Searchfor the
causes of schizophrenia. Vol. I. Berlin, Springer-Verlag, pp. 47-74.
Hafner H (1988) What is schizophrenia? Changing perspectives in epidemiology.
European archives of psychiatry and neurological sciences, 238: 63-72.
Hafner H (1989) Application of epidemiological research toward a model for the
etiology of schizophrenia. Schizophrenia research, 2: 375-383.
Hafner H (1990) New perspectives in the epidemiology ofschizophrenia. In: Hafner H,
Gattaz WF, eds. Searchfor the causes of schizophrenia, Vol 11. Berlin, Springer-Verlag,
pp. 408-43 1.
Hafner H, an der Heiden W (1986) The Mannheim case register: the long-stay
population. In: ten Horn GHMM et al., eds. Psychiatric case registers in public health.
Amsterdam, Elsevier, pp. 28-38.
Hafner H, Gattaz WF (1991) Is schizophrenia disappearing? European archives of
psychiatry and clinical neuroscience, 240: 374-376.
Hafner H, Reimann H (1970) Spatial distribution of mental disorders in Mannheim,
1965. In: Hare EH, Wing JK, eds. Psychiatric epidemiology, London, Oxford
University Press, pp. 341-354.
Hafner H et al. (1987) Abnormal seasonality of schizophrenic births: a specific finding?
European archives of psychiatry and neurological sciences, 236: 333-342.

References
Hafner H et al. (1989) How does gender influence age at first hospitalization for
schizophrenia? Psychological medicine, 19: 903-9 18.
Hafner H et al. (1991a) An animal model for the effects of estradiol on dopaminemediated behavior: implications for sex differences in schizophrenia. Psychiatry
research, 38: 125- 134.
Hafner H et al. (1991b) Oestradiol enhances the vulnerability threshold for schizophrenia in women by an early effect on dopaminergic neurotransmission. Evidence
from an epidemiological study and from animal experiments. European archives of
psychiatry and clinical neuroscience, 241 : 65-68.
Hafner H et al. (1992). First onset and early symptomatology of schizophrenia. A
chapter of epidemiological and neurobiological research into age and sex differences. European archives of psychiatry and clinical neuroscience, 242: 109- 118.
Hafner H et al. (1993). The influence of age and sex on the onset and early course in
schizophrenia. British journal of psychiatry, 162: 80-86.
Hagnell 0 (1966) A prospective study of the incidence of mental disorder. Lund, NorstedtsBonniers.
Hagnell 0 et al. (1990) The incidence of mental illness over a quarter of a century: the Lundby
longitudinal study of mental illnesses in a total population based on 42,000 observation years.
Stockholm, Almquist & Wiksell International.
Hailey AM et al. (1974) Psychiatric services in Camberwell and Salford: statistics from
the Camberwell and Salford Registers: 1964-1973. London, MRC Social Psychiatry
Unit.
Halevi HS (1963) Frequency of mental illness among Jews in Israel. Internationaljournal
of social psychiatry, 9: 268-282.
Halldin T (1984) Prevalence of mental disorder in an urban population in central
Sweden. Acta psychiatrica scandinavica, 69: 503-5 18.
Hambrecht M et al. (1992) Gender differences in schizophrenia in three cultures.
Results of the W H O collaborative study on psychiatric disability. Socialpsychiatry and
psychiatric epidemiology, 27: 117- 121.
Hambrecht M et al. (1992) Evidence for a gender bias in epidemiological studies of
schizophrenia. Schizophrenia research, 8: 223-23 1.
Hambrecht M et al. (1994) Higher mortality risk for schizophrenia in males: fact or
fiction? Comprehensive psychiatry, 35: 39-49.
Harding T W et al. (1980) Mental disorders in primary care: a study of their frequency
and diagnosis in four developing countries. Psychological medicine, 10: 231-241.
Hare EH (1956) Mental illness and social conditions in Bristol. Journal of mental science,
102: 349-357.
Hare EH (1983) Was insanity on the increase? British journal ofpsychiatry, 142: 439-445.

Schizophrenia
Hare EH (1986) Aspects of the epidemiology of schizophrenia. British journal of
psychiatry, 149: 554-561.
Hare EH (1987) Epidemiology of schizophrenia and affective psychoses. British medical
bulletin, 43: 514-530.
Hare EH (1988a) Temporal factors and trends, including birth seasonality and the viral
hypothesis. In: Tsuang MT, Simpson JC, eds. Handbook of schizophrenia. Vol. 3:
Nosology, epidemiology and genetics. Amsterdam, Elsevier, pp. 345-377.
Hare EH (198813) Schizophrenia as a recent disease. British journal of psychiatry, 153:
521-531.
Hare EH, Moran P (1981) A relation between seasonal temperature and the birth rate
of schizophrenic patients. Acta psychiatrica scandinavica, 63: 396-405.
Hare EH, Price JS (1968) Mental disorder and season of birth: comparison of psychoses
with neuroses. British journal of psychiatry, 115: 533-540.
Hare EH et al. (1974) Mental disorder and season of birth: a national sample compared
with the general population. British journal of psychiatry, 124: 8 1-86.
Harrison G, Mason P (1993) Schizophrenia-falling
British journal of psychiatry, 163: 535-541.

incidence and better outcome?

Harrison G et al. (1988) A prospective study of severe mental disorder in AfroCaribbean patients. Psychological medicine, 18: 643-657.
Harrison G et al. (1991) Changes in the administrative incidence of schizophrenia.
British journal of psychiatry, 159: 8 11-8 16.
Haruki S (1972) A psychiatric, epidemiological, and socio-psychiatric survey on mental
disorders in Tsuma-mura, Okinoshima Island, Shimane Prefecture. Psychiatria et
neurologia jafionica, 7 1: 30 1-3 11.
Helgason T (1964) Epidemiology of mental disorders in Iceland. Acta psychiatrica
scandinavica, (Suppl.): 173.
Helgason L (1977) Psychiatric services and mental illness in Iceland. Acta psychiatrica
scandinavica, (Suppl.): 268.
Helzer JE (1988) Uses of structured diagnostic interviews for clinical practice and
research in schizophrenia. In: Tsuang MT, Simpson JC, eds. Handbook of schizophrenia. Vol. 3: Nosology, epidemiology and genetics. Amsterdam, Elsevier, pp. 41-61.
Helzer JE et al. (1981) Renard diagnostic interview. Archives of general psychiatry, 38:
393-398.
Helzer JE et al. (1985) A comparison of clinical and DIS diagnoses: physician
reexamination of lay interviewed cases in the general population. Archives of general
psychiatry, 42: 657-666.
Henderson AS, Burrow GD (1988) Handbook of social psychiatry. Amsterdam, Elsevier.

References
Heston LL (1966) Psychiatric disorders in foster home reared children of schizophrenic
mothers. British journal of psychiatry, 112: 8 19-825.
Hiratsuka T, Nomura A (1941) A psychiatric investigation by census in a village,
Kanagawa Prefecture. Japanese journal of health and human ecology, 9: 436-455.
Hirayasu T (1969) An epidemiological and sociopsychiatric study on the mental and
neurological disorders in an isolated island in Okinawa. Psychiatria et neurologia
japonica, 7 1: 466-49 1.
Hollingshead AB, Redlich FC (1958) Social class and mental illness. New York, Wiley.
Holzer CE et al. (1986) The increased risk for specific psychiatric disorders among
persons of low socioeconomic status. Americanjournal of social psychiatry, 4: 259-27 l .
Hwu H G et al. (1989) Prevalence of psychiatric disorders in Taiwan defined by the
Chinese diagnostic interview schedule. Acta psychiatrica scandinavica, 79: 136-147.
Iacono WG, Beiser M (1992) Are males more likely than females to develop
schizophrenia? American journal of psychiatry, 149: 1070-1074.
Jablensky A (1986) Epidemiology of schizophrenia: a European perspective. Schizophrenia bulletin, 12: 52-73.
Jablensky A (1988) Schizophrenia and the environment. In: Henderson S, Burrows G,
eds. Handbook of social psychiatry. Amsterdam, Elsevier, pp. 103-1 16.
Jablensky A (1989) An overview of the World Health Organization multicentre studies
of schizophrenia. In: Williams P et al., eds. The scope of epidemiologicalpsychiatry:essays
in honour of Micheal Shepherd. London, Routledge, pp. 455-47 1.
Jablensky A (1993) The epidemiology of schizophrenia. Current opinion in psychiatry, 6:
43-52.
Jablensky A, Sartorius N (1975) Culture and schizophrenia. Psychological medicine, 5:
113-124.
Jablensky A, Sartorius N (1987) Is schizophrenia universal? Acta psychiatrica Scandinauica, 344 (Suppl.): 65-70.
Jablensky A et al. (1987) Incidence worldwide of schizophrenia. British journal of
psychiatry, 151: 408-42 1 (letter).
Jablensky A et al. (1992) Schizophrenia: manifestations, incidence and course in
different cultures. A World Health Organization ten-country study. Psychological
medicine, Suppl. 20.
Jaco EG (1960) Social epidemiology of mental disorders: a psychiatric survey of Texas. New
York, Russell Sage Foundation.
Jacobsen B, Kinney DK (1980) Perinatal complications in adopted and non-adopted
schizophrenics and their controls: preliminary results. Acta psychiatrica scandinavica,
285 (Suppl.): 337-346.

Schizophrenia
Japanese Ministry of Health and Welfare (1955) Nationwide prevalence survey of mental
disorders in 1954, Tokyo, (unpublished mimeograph cited in: Kato M (1969)
Psychiatric epidemiological surveys in Japan: the problem of case finding. In:
Caudill M, Lin T , eds. Mental health research in Asia and the Pacific. Honolulu,
East-West Center Press, pp. 92-104).
Japanese Ministry of Health and Welfare (1965) Wagakuni ni okerv seishin-shogai no
genj6. Tokyo: Kosei-shoshii Eisei Kyoku (cited in Kato M (1969) Psychiatric
epidemiological surveys in Japan: the problem of case finding. In: Caudill M, Lin T ,
eds. Mental health research in Asia and the Pacific. Honolulu, East-West Center Press,
pp. 92-104).
Jayasundera M G (1969) Mental health surveys in Ceylon. In: Caudill M , Lin T, eds.
Mental health research in Asia and the Pacijc. Honolulu, East-West Center Press, pp.
54-65.
Jeste DV et al. (1985) Did schizophrenia exist before the eighteenth century?
Comprehensive psychiatry, 26: 493-503.
Jones IH, Horne DJ de L (!973) Psychiatric disorders among Aborigines of the
Australian Western Desert: further data and discussion. Social science and medicine, 7:
219-228.
Jones PB et al. (1993) Premorbid social underachievement in schizophrenia: results
from the Camberwell Collaborative Study. British journal of psychiatry, 162: 65-71.
Joyce PR (1987) Changing trends in first admissions and readmissions for mania and
schizophrenia in New Zealand. Australian and New Zealand journal of psychiatry, 21:
82-86.
Kaila M (1942) ijber die Durchschnittschgufigkeit der Geisteskrankheiten und des
Schwachsinns in Finland. Acta psychiatrica et neurologica scandinavica, 17: 47-67.
KaliEanin P (1987) Primena epidemiofikog metoda psihijatriji-epidemioloSkiaspekti schizofrenije
u Beogradu. Belgrade, Institut za struEno usavriavanje i specijalizaciju zdravstvenih
radnika.
Kato M (1969) Psychiatric epidemiological surveys in Japan: the problem of case
finding. In: Caudill M, Lin T , eds. Mental health research in Asia and the Pacijic.
Honolulu, East-West Center Press, pp. 92-104.
Kavanagh DJ (1992) Recent developments in expressed emotion and schizophrenia.
British journal of psychiatry, 160: 60 1-620.
Keith SJ et al. (1991) Schizophrenic disorders in America. In: Robins L, Regier DA,
eds. Psychiatric disorders in America. New York, Free Press, pp. 33-51.
Kendell RE (1987) Diagnosis and classification of functional psychoses. British medical
bulletin, 43: 499-5 13.
Kendell RE, Adams W (1991) Unexplained fluctuations in the risk of schizophrenia by
month and year of birth. Britishjournal of psychiatry, 158: 758-763.

l

References
Kendell RE, Kemp I W (1987) Winter-born v summer-born schizophrenics. British
journal of psychiatry, 151: 499-505.
Kendell RE, Kemp I W (1989) Maternal influenza in the etiology of schizophrenia.
Archives of general psychiatry, 46: 878-882.
Kendell R E et al. (1979) Prognostic implications of six alternative definitions of
schizophrenia. Archives of general psychiatry, 35: 25-3 l .
Kendell R E et al. (1993) The problem of detecting changes in the incidence of
schizophrenia. British journal of psychiatry, 162: 2 12-2 18.
Kendler K (1990) Familial risk factors and the familial aggregation of psychiatric
disorders. Psychological medicine, 20: 3 11-3 19.
Kendler KS et al. (1989) Psychotic disorders in DSM-111-R. American journal of
psychiatry, 146: 953-963.
Kendrick T et al. (1991) Role of general practitioners in care of long term mentally ill
patients. British medical journal, 302: 508-510.
Kessler RC et al. (1987) Psychiatric diagnoses of medical service users: evidence from
the epidemiologic catchment area program. American journal of public health, 77:
18-23.

1

Kessler R C et al. (1994) Lifetime and 12-month prevalence of DSM-111-R psychiatric
disorders in the United States. Archives of general psychiatry, 51: 8-19.

l

Kety SS (1988) Schizophrenic illness in the families of schizophrenic adoptees: findings
from the Danish national sample. Schizophrenia bulletin, 14: 217-222.
Khandelwal SK, Workneh F (1988) Psychiatric outpatients in a general hospital in
Ethiopia: diagnostic and sociodemographic characteristics. International journal of
social psychiatry, 34: 230-235.
Klee G D et al. (1967) An ecological analysis of diagnosed mental illness in Baltimore.
In: Monroe R R et al., eds. Psychiatric epidemiology and mental health planning,
Washington, DC, American Psychiatric Association, pp. 107- 148.
Klemperer J (1933) Zur Belastungsstatistik der Durchschnitts bevolkerung. Psychosehaufigkeit unter 1000 stichprobemassig ausgelesenen Probanden. Zeitschrift fur die
gesamte Neurologie und Psychiatrie, 146: 277-3 16.
Koegel P et al. (1988) The prevalence of specific psychiatric disorders among homeless
individuals in the inner city of L O S ~ n ~ e l e Archives
s.
of general psychiatry, 45:
1085-1092.
Koehler K et al. (1977) First-rank symptoms of schizophrenia in Schneider-oriented
German centers. Archives of general psychiatry, 34: 8 10-8 13.
Kohn ML (1973) Social class and schizophrenia: a critical review and a reformulation.
Schizophrenia bulletin, 7: 60-79.

Schizophrenia
Kraepelin E (1896) Dementia praecox. In: Psychiatrie. 5th ed. Leipzig, Barth. Translated
and published in: Cutting J, Shepherd M, eds. (1987), The clinical roots of the
schizophrenic concept. Oxford, Oxford University Press, pp. 13-24.
Kraepelin E (1909) Psychiatrie. 9th ed. Leipzig, Barth.
Kraepelin E (1926) General paralysis. Journal of nervous and mental disease, 63: 209-2 18.
Kraepelin E (1927) Dementia praecox and paraphrenia. Edinburgh, Livingstone.
Kramer K (1969) Cross-national study ofdiagnosis of the mental disorders: origin of the
problem. American journal of psychiatry, 125 (Suppl.): 1-1 1.
Kramer M (1957) Discussion of the context of prevalence and incidence as related to
epidemiologic studies of mental disorders. American journal of public health, 48:
826.
Kramer M (1 978) Population changes and schizophrenia, 1970- 1985. In: Wynne LC
et al., eds. The nature of schizophrenia: new approaches to research and treatment. New York,
Wiley, pp. 545-571.
Kramer M et al. (1961) Studies of the incidence and prevalence of hospitalized mental
disorders in the United Staes: current status and future goals. In: Hoch PH, Lubin J,
eds. Comparative epidemiolo~of the mental disorders, New York, Grune & Stratton, pp.
56- 100.
Krasik ED, Semin I R (1980) Epidemiological aspects of first admissions of schizophrenic patients. Zhurnal nevropatologij psikijatrii, 80: 1354-1359.
Krupinski J (1983) Admissions, discharges and deaths, 1979-1980. Melbourne, Mental
Health Research Institute, Health Commission of Victoria (Statistical Bulletin
No. 15).
Krupinski J, Alexander L (1983) Patterns of psychiatric morbidity in Victoria,
Australia, in relation to changes in diagnostic criteria 1948-1978. Social psychiatry,
18: 61-67.
Kulcar Z et al. (1971) Selected aspects of the epidemiology of psychoses in Croatia,
Yugoslavia: pilot study of communities. Americanjournal of epidemiology, 94: 118- 125.
Kuriansky JB et al. (1974) O n trends in the diagnosis of schizophrenia. Americanjournal
of psychiatry, 131: 402-408.
Lamb HR, Grant R W (1982) The mentally ill in an urban county jail. Archives of general
psychiatry, 39: 17-22.
Lane E, Albee GW (1966) Comparative birthweights of schizophrenics and their
siblings. Journal of psychiatry, 64: 227-231.
Larsson T, Sjogren T (1954) A methodological, psychiatric, and statistical study of a
large Swedish rural population. Acta psychiatrica et neurologica scandinavica, (Suppl.):
89.

I

1

References
Lee CK et al. (1990a) Psychiatric epidemiology in Korea. Part I: Gender and age
differences in Seoul. Journal of nervous and mental disease, 178: 242-246.
Lee CK et al. (1990b) Psychiatric epidemiology in Korea. Part 11: Urban and rural
differences. Journal of nervous and mental disease, 178: 247-252.
Leff J (1988) Psychiatry around the globe: a transcultural view, 2nd ed. London, Gaskell.
Lehtinen V et al. (1978) Preventive implications of a social-psychiatric survey in the
Finnish population. Psychiatria fennica, 78: 143-1 5 1.
Lehtinen V et al. (1990a) Prevalence ofmental disorders among adults in Finland: basic
results from the Mini Finland Health Survey. Acta psychiatrica scandinavica, 8 1:
418-425.
Lehtinen V et al. (1990b) The prevalence of PSE-CATEGO disorders in a Finnish
adult population cohort. Social psychiatry andpsychiatric epidemiology, 25: 187-192.
Leighton DC et al. (1963) The character of danger: the Stirling County study of psychiatric
disorder and sociocultural environment. Volume I I I. Psychiatric symptoms in selected communities. New York, Basic Books.
Lemkau PV et al. (1942) Mental hygiene problems in an urban district. Mental hygiene,
25: 624-646.
Lemkau PV et al. (1943) Mental hygiene problems in an urban district: second paper.
Mental hygiene, 26: 100-1 19.
Levav I et al. (1989) Salud mental para todos en America Latina y el Caribe. Bases
epidemiologicas para el acci6n. Boletino de la Ojicina Sanitaria Panamericana, 107:
196-219.
Lewine RRJ (1981) Sex differences in schizophrenia: timing or subtypes? Psychological
bulletin, 90: 432-444.
Lewis G et al. (1992) Schizophrenia and city life. Lancet, 340: 137-140.
Lewis MS (1989) Age incidence and schizophrenia. Part 1. The season of birth
controversy. Schizophrenia bulletin, 15: 59-73.
Lewis S ( 1992) Sex and schizophrenia: vive la diffkrence. British journal of psychiatry, 161:
445-450.
Lewis SW, Murray R M (1987) Obstetric complications, neurodevelopmental deviance
and risk of schizophrenia. Journal of psychiatric research, 2 1: 41 3-42 1.
Liebermann YI (1974) O n the problem of incidence of schizophrenia: materials from a
clinical and epidemiological survey. <hurnal neuropatologii psikijatrii, 74: 1224-1 23 1.
Lin K M et al. (1981) Overview of mental disorders in Chinese cultures: review of
epidemiological and clinical studies. In: Kleinman A, Lin TY, eds. Normal and
abnormal behaviour in Chinese cultures. Dordrecht, Reidel, pp. 237-272.

Schizobhrenia
Lin T (1953) A study of the incidence of mental disorder in Chinese and other cultures.
Psychiatry, 16: 3 13-336.
Lin T et al. (1969) Mental disorders in Taiwan, fifteen years later: a preliminary report.
In: Caudill M, Lin T, eds. Mental health research in Asia and the Pac$c. Honolulu,
East-West Center Press, pp. 66-91.
Lin TY et al. (1989) Effects of social change on mental disorders in Taiwan:
observations based on a 15-year follow-up survey of general populations in three
communities. Acta psychiatrica scandinavica, 79 (Suppl. 348): 11-34.
Link B, Dohrenwend BP (1980) Formulation of hypotheses about the ratio of untreated
to treated cases in the true prevalence studies of functional psychiatric disorders in
adults in the United States. In: Dohrenwend BP et al., Mental illness in the United
States: epidemiologic estimates. New York, Praeger.
Link BG et al. (1986) Socio-economic status and schizophrenia: noisome occupational
characteristics as a risk factor. American sociological review, 51: 242-258.
Lipkowitz MH, Idupuganti S (1985) Diagnosing schizophrenia in 1982: the effect of
DSM-111. American journal of psychiatry, 142: 634-637.
Loranger AW (1990) The impact of DSM-111 on diagnostic practice in a University
Hospital. Archives of general psychiatry, 47: 672-675.
Mabry CC (1990) Phenylketonuria: contemporary screening and diagnosis. Annals of
clinical and laboratory science, 20: 392-397.
Malzberg B (1969) Are immigrants psychologically disturbed? In: Plog SC, Edgerton
RB, eds. Changingperspectives in mental illness, New York, Holt, Rinehart & Winston,
pp. 395-42 1.
Manderscheid RW, Sonnenschein MA, eds. (1990) Mental health, United States, 1990.
Washington, Government Printing Office (DHHS Pub. No. (ADM) 90- 1708).
Marder SR et al. (1979) Predicting drug-free improvement in schizophrenic psychosis.
Archives oygeneral psychiatry, 36: 1080- 1085.
Masterson E, O'Shea B (1984) Smoking and malignancy in schizophrenia. British
journal of psychiatry, 145: 429-432.
Mavreas VG, Bebbington P (1987) Psychiatric morbidity in London's Greek-Cypriot
immigrant community. Social psychiatry, 22: 150- 159.
Mayer-Gross W (1948) Mental health survey in a rural area. Eugenics review, 40:
140-148.
McGlashan T H , Fenton WS (1991) Classical subtypes for schizophrenia. Schizophrenia
bulletin, 17: 609-623.
McGorry PD et al. (1990) The Royal Park Hospital Multidiagnostic Instrument for

I

i

l

References
Psychosis: a comprehensive assessment procedure for the acute psychotic episode. I.
Rationale and review. Schizophrenia bulletin, 16: 50 1-5 15.
McGovern D, Cope R V (1987) First psychiatric admission rate of first and second
generation Afro-Caribbeans. Social psychiatry, 22: 139-149.
McNeil T F (1987) Perinatal influences in the development of schizophrenia. In:
Helmchen H, Henn FA, Biologicalperspectives of schizophrenia, New York, John Wiley,
pp. 125-138.
McNeil T et al. (1975) Birth rates of schizophrenics following relatively warm versus
relatively cool summers. Archiv fur Psychiatrie und Nervenkrankheiten, 221: 1-10.
McNeil TF et al. (1993) Head circumference in "preschizophrenic" and control
neonates. British journal of psychiatry, 162: 5 17-523.
Mednick SA et al. (1987) The Copenhagen high-risk project, 1962-86. Schizophrenia
bulletin, 13: 485-495.
Mednick SA et al. (1988) Adult schizophrenia following prenatal expmure to an
influenza epidemic. Archives of general psychiatry, 45: 189-1 92.
Mellor CS (1982) The present status of first-rank symptoms. British journal of psychiatry,
140: 423-424.
Mellsop GW et al. (1991) Reliability of the draft diagnostic criteria for research of ICD10 in comparison with ICD-10 and DSM-111-R. Acta psychiatrica scandinavica, 84:
332-335.
Mortensen PB et al. ( 1991) Is schizophrenia disappearing? European archives of psychiaky
and clinical neurosciences, 240: 374.
Mukasa H et al. (1941) Ergebnisse der Geisteskrankenzahlung in einen japanischen
Inzuchtgebieten. I. Mitteilung. Japanese journal of health and human ecology, 9:
3555397.
Miiller HG, Kleider W (1990) A hypothesis on the abnormal seasonality of schizophrenic births. European archives of psychiatry and neurological sciences, 239: 331-334.
Munk-Jergensen P (1986) Decreasing first-admission rates of schizophrenia among
males in Denmark from 1970 to 1984. Acta psychiatrica scandinavica, 73: 645-650.
Munk-Jergensen P (1987a) Decreasing rates of diagnoses of schizophrenia in Denmark.
Acta psychiatrica scandinavica, 76: 333-336 (letter).
Munk-Jergensen P (198715) Why has the incidence of schizophrenia in Danish
psychiatric institutions decreased since 1970? Actapsychiatrica scandinavica, 75: 62-68.
Munk-Jergensen P, J~rgensenP (1986) Decreasing rates of first-admission diagnoses of
schizophrenia among females in Denmark from 1970 to 1984. Acta psychiatrica
scandinavica, 74: 379-383.

Schizophrenia
Munk-Jsrgensen P, Mortensen PB (1992). Incidence and other aspects of the epidemiology of schizophrenia in Denmark, 197 1- 1987. British journal of psychiatry, 161:
489-495.
Murphy HBM, Lemieux M (1967) Quelques considirations sur le taux klevk de
schizophrinie dans un type de communauti: canadienne-franqaise. Canadian Psychiatric Association journal, 12: S7 1-S8 1.
Murphy HBM, Taumoepeau BM (1980) Traditionalism and mental health in the
South Pacific: a re-examination of an old hypothesis. Psychological medicine, 10:
47 1-482.
Murray R M et al. (1991) Reply: The incidence of schizophrenia and of causal
environmental factors varies in time and place. European archives of psychiatry and
clinical neuroscience, 240: 3 77-3 78.
Murthy RS et al. (1978) Mentally ill in a rural community: some initial experiences in
case identification and management. Indian journal of psychiatry, 20: 143- 147.
Myers JK et al. (1984) Six month prevalences of psychiatric disorders in three sites.
Archives of general psychiatry, 41 : 959-967.
Nandi DN et al. (1975) Psychiatric disorders in a rural community in West Bengal: an
epidemiological study. Indian journal of psychiatry, 17: 87-99.
Nandi DN et al. (1980) Socio-economic status and mental morbidity in central tribes
and castes in India: a cross-cultural study. British journal of psychiatry, 136: 73-85.
Nazareth I et al. (1993) Care of schizophrenia in general practice. British medicaljournal,
307: 910.
Nielsen J (1976) The Samso project from 1957 to 1974. Actapsychiatrica scandinavica, 54:
198-222.
Nielsen J, Nielsen JA (1977) A census study of mental illness in Samso. Psychological
medicine, 7: 491 -503.
Ni NuallLin M et al. (1987) Incidence of schizophrenia in Ireland. Psychological medicine,
17: 943-948.
Norman MG, Malla AK (1993) Stressful life events and schizophrenia. I: A review of
the research. British journal of psychiatry, 162: 161- 166.
Norris V (1959) Mental illness in London. London, Chapman & Hall (Maudsley
Monograph no. 6).
North AF, MacDonald H M (1977) Why are neonatal mortality rates lower in small
black infants of similar birth weights? Journal of pediatrics, 90: 809-810.
O'Callaghan E et al. (1991) Season of birth in schizophrenia: evidence for confinement
of an excess of winter births to patients without a family history of mental disorder.
British journal of psychiatry, 158: 764-769.

I

I

References
O'Callaghan E et al. (1991) Schizophrenia after prenatal exposure to 1957 A2
influenza epidemic. Lancet, 337: 1248-1 250.
O'Connor A, Walsh D (1991) Activities of Irishpsychiatric hospitals and units 1988. Dublin,
The Health Research Board.

l

1
l

I

Odegaard 0 (1932) Immigration and insanity: a study of mental disease among the
Norwegian-born population in Minnesota. Acta psychiatrica scandinavica, Suppl. 4.
Odegaard 0 (1946) A statistical investigation of the incidence of mental disorder in
Norway. Psychiatric quarterly, 20: 38 1-40 1.
Odegaard 0 (1956) The incidence of psychoses in various occupations. International
journal of social psychiatry, 2: 85-1 04.
Odegaard 0 (1960) A statistical study of factors influencing discharge from psychiatric
hospitals. Journal of mental science, 106: 1124-1 133.
Odegaard 0 (1971) Hospitalized psychoses in Norway: time trends 1926-1965. Social
psychiatry, 6: 53-58.
Odegaard 0 (1974) Season of birth in the general population and in patients with
mental disorder in Norway. British journal of psychiatry, 125: 397-405.
Odejide A 0 et al. (1989) Psychiatry in Africa: an overview. Americanjournal ofpsychiatry,
146: 708-7 16.
O'Hare A et al. (1980) Seasonality of schizophrenic births in Ireland. Britishjournal of
psychiatry, 137: 74-77.
Ogino R , Nagao S (1943) ~ b edie
r ortlichen Verschiedenheiten der erbpsychiatrischen
Bevolkerungsbelastungen. I. Die erblichen BesonderF Sten einer Inzuchtinsel in den
Iejima-Inselgruppen. Psychiatria et neurologia japonica, 47: 529-536.
Okabe S (1957) Psychiatric and demographic census in the districts of consanguinity.
Psychiatria et neurologiajaponica, 59: 663-676.
Ouspenskaya LY (1978) Problems of methodology of comparative epidemiological
studies and the characteristics of prevalence of schizophrenia in various areas of the
country. zhurnal nevropatologii psikjatrii, 78: 724-748.
Parker G, Balza B (1977) Season of birth and schizophrenia - an equatorial study. Acta
psychiatrica scandinavica, 56: 143-1 46.

I

Parker G, Neilson M (1976) Mental disorder and season of birth-a southern
hemisphere study. British journal of psychiatry, 129: 355-361.

1

Parker G et al. (1985) Changes in the diagnoses of the functional psychoses associated
with the introduction of lithium. British journal of psychiatry, 146: 377-382.
Parkes CM et al. (1962) The general practitioner and the schizophrenic patient. British
medical journal, ii: 972-976.

Schizophrenia
Parnas J et al. (1982) Perinatal complications and clinical outcome within the
schizophrenia spectrum. British journal of psychiatry, 140: 4 16-420.
Pasamanick B (1986) Seasonality of schizophrenic births. American journal of orthopsychiatry, 56: 168-169.
Phillips L (1953) Case history data and prognosis in schizophrenia. Journal of nervous and
mental disease. 117: 5 15-525.
Pichot P (1990) The diagnosis and classification of mental disorders in the Frenchspeaking countries: background, current values and comparison with other classifications. In: Sartorius N et al., eds. Sources and traditions of class$cation in psychiatry.
Bern, Hogrefe & Huber, pp. 7-57.
Pollack ES et al. (1964) Socio-economic and family characteristics of patients admitted
to psychiatric services. American journal of public health, 54: 506-518.
Pope HG, Lipinski JF (1978) Diagnosis in schizophrenia and manic-depressive illness: a
reassessment of the specificity of 'schizophrenic' symptoms in the light of current
research. Archives of general psychiatry, 35: 81 1-828.
Preiser M, Jeffrey W (1979) Schizophrenic patients and Schneiderian first-rank
symptoms. Americanjournal of psychiatry, 136: 323-326.
Primrose EJR (1962) Psychological illness: a community study. London, Tavistock.
Prince MJ, Phelan MC (1990) Trends in schizophrenia. Lancet, 335: 85 1-852 (letter).
Pull CB, Wittchen H U (1991) CIDI, SCAN and IPDE: structured diagnostic
interviews for ICD-10 and DSM-111-R. European psychiatry, 6: 277-285.
Pulver AE et al. (1983) Risk factors in schizophrenia: season of birth in Maryland,
U.S.A. British journal of psychiatry, 143: 389-396.
Pulver AE et al. (1992) Risk factors for schizophrenia. Season of birth, gender and
familial risk. British journal of psychiatry, 160: 65-7 1.
Rajkumar S et al. (199 1) Schizophrenia Research Foundation (India), Madras, India.
Cited in: Eaton WW (1991) Update on the epidemiology of schizophrenia.
Epidemiologic reviews, 13: 320-328.
Regier DA et al. (1990) Comorbidity of mental disorders with alcohol and other drug
abuse. Journal of the American Medical Association, 264: 25 11-25 18.
Reveley AM et al. (1982) Cerebral ventricular size in twins discordant for schizophrenia. Lancet, i: 540-54 1.
Riecher-Rossler A et al. (1992) Is age of onset in schizophrenia influenced by marital
status? Social psychiatry and psychiatric epidemiology, 27: 122- 128.
Rin H, Lin T (1962) Mental illness among Formosan aborigines as compared with the
Chinese in Taiwan. Journal of mental science, 108: 134-146.

References
Robins LN et al. (1981) National Institute of Mental Health Diagnostic Interview
Schedule: its history, characteristics, and validity. Archives of general psychiatry, 39:
38 1-389.
Robins LN et al. (1988) The Composite International Diagnostic Interview. Archives of
general psychiatry, 45: 1069-1076.
Roger WF (1950) A comparative study of the Wakefield prison population in 1948. I.
British journal of delinquency, 1: 15-28.
Roth LH, Ervin FR (1971) Psychiatric care of federal prisoners. American journal of
psychiatry, 128: 424-430.
Roth WF, Luton FH (1943) The mental health program in Tennessee. Americanjournal
of psychiatry, 99: 662-675.
Rotstein V T (1977) Material from a psychiatric survey of sample groups from the
adult population in several areas of the USSR. xhurnal nevropatologii psikijatrii, 77:
569-574.
Roy C et al. (1970) The prevalence of mental disorders among Saskatchewan Indians.
Journal of cross-cultural psychology, 1: 383-392.
Sacchetti E et al. (1992) The brain damage hypothesis of the seasonality of births in
schizophrenia and major affective disorders: evidence from computerized tomography. British journal of psychiatry, 160: 390-397.
Sartorius N et al. (1987) Course ofschizophrenia in different countries: some results of a
W H O International Comparative 5-year Follow-up Study. In: Hafner H, Gattaz
WF, Janzarik W, eds. searchfor the causes ofsch&ophrenia. ~ e r l i nSpringer-Verlag,
,
pp.
107-1 13.
Sartorius N et al. (1993) Progress towards achieving a common language in psychiatry:
results from the ICD-10 clinical field trial of the clinical guidelines accompanying
the W H O classification of mental and behavioural disorders in the ICD-10. Archives
of general psychiatry, 50: 115- 124.
Sass H (1987) The classification of schizophrenia in the different diagnostic systems. In:
Hafner H, Gattaz WF, Janzarik W, eds. Search for the causes of schizophrenia. Berlin,
Springer-Verlag, pp. 19-43.
Sato I (1966) Seishin-by6in no tachiba kara. Seishin igaku, 8: 6-10.
Schroeder CW (1942) Mental disorders in cities. American journal of sociology, 48: 40-48.
Schneider K (1959) Clinical psychopathology. New York, Grune & Stratton.
Schulberg H C et al. (1985) Assessing depression in primary medical and psychiatric
practices. Archives of general psychiatry, 42: 1164-1 170.
Scull A (1979) Museums of madness: the social organization of insanity in nineteenth-century
England. London, Allen Lane.

Schizophrenia
Seeman M (1982) Gender differences in schizophrenia. Canadianjournal of psychiatry, 27:
107-1 12.
Selten JPCJ, Slaets JPJ (1994) Evidence against maternal influenza as a risk factor for
schizophrenia. British journal of psychiatry, 164: 674-676.
Sethi BB et al. (1967) 300 urban families: a psychiatric study. Indian journal ofpsychiatry,
9: 280-302.
Sethi BB et al. (1972a) Migration and mental health. Indian journal ofpsychiatry, 14:
115-121.
Sethi BB et al. (1972b) A psychiatric survey of 500 rural families. Indian journal of
psychiatry, 14: 183- 196.
Sethi BB et al. (1974) Mental health and urban life: a study of850 families. Britishjournal
of psychiatry, 124: 243-246.
Sham PC et al. (1992) Schizophrenia following pre-natal exposure to influenza
epidemics between 1939 and 1960. British journal of psychiatry, 160: 461 -466.
Sham PC et al. (1993) Risk of schizophrenia and age difference with older siblings.
Evidence for a maternal viral infection hypothesis? Britishjournal of psychiatry, 163:
627-633.
Shen Yucun et al. (1981) Investigations of mental disorders in Beijing suburban district.
Chinese medical journal, 94: 153-1 56.
Shen Yucun et al. (1988) A survey of mental disorders in a suburb of Beijing.
Internationaljournal of mental health, 16: 75-80.
Shepherd M (1957) A study of the majorpsychoses in an English county. London, Chapman &
Hall (Maudsley Monograph No. 3).
Shepherd M et al. (1966) Psychiatric illness in generalpractice. London, Oxford University
Press.
Shepherd M et al. (1989) The natural history of schizophrenia: a five-year follow-up
study of outcome and prediction in a representative sample of schizophrenics.
Psychological medicine, 15 (Suppl.) : 1-46
Shibata Y et al. (1975) A psychiatric study on mental disorders in an isolated island.
Clinical psychiatry, 17: 907-92 1.
Shibata Y et al. (1978) A psychiatric and socio-medical study on schizophrenics in an
isolated island in Yamaguchi Prefecture. Clinical psychiatry, 20: 843-852.
Shimura M et al. (1977) Season of birth of schizophrenia in Tokyo, Japan. Acta
psychiatrica scandinavica, 55: 225-232.
Sikanerty T, Eaton WW (1984) Prevalence of schizophrenia in the Labadi district of
Ghana. Acta psychiatrica scandinavica, 69: 156- 161.

References
Silverstein ML, Harrow M (1978) First-rank symptoms in the post-acute schizophrenic: a followup study. American journal of psychiatry, 135: 1481- 1486.
Sjogren T (1948) Genetic-statistical and psychiatric investigations of a West Swedish
population. Acta psychiatrica et neurologica scandinavica, 52 (Suppl.).
Spitzer RL et al. (1977) Research diagnostic criteria. 3rd ed. New York, New York State
Psychiatric Institute.
Spitzer RL, Endicott J (1978) N I M H Clinical Research Branch Collaborative Program
on the Psychology of Depression: schedule for affective disoriiers and schizophrenia. 3rd
ed. New York, New York State Psychiatric Institute, Biometrics Research
Division.
Spitzer RL, Fleiss JL (1974) A reanalysis of the reliability of psychiatric diagnosis.
British journal of psychology, 125: 341-347.
Spitzer RL, Williams JBW (1985) Structured clinical interview for DSM-111. New York,
New York State Psychiatric Institute, Biometrics Research Division.
Stabenau JR, Pollin W (1967) Early characteristics of MZ twins discordant for
schizophrenia. Archives of general psychiatry, 17: 723-734.
StefAnsson JG et al. (1991) Lifetime prevalence of specific mental disorders among
people born in Iceland in 1931. Acta psychiatrica scandinavica, 84: 142- 149.
Stein L (1957) "Social class" gradient in schizophrenia. British journal of preventive and
social medicine, 11: 181- 195.
Stephens JH et al. (1966) Prognostic factors in recovered and deteriorated schizophrenics. American journal of psychiatry, 122: 1116-1 121.
Stevens J (1987) Brief psychoses: do they contribute to the good prognosis and equal
prevalence of schizophrenia in developing countries? Britishjournal of psychiatry, 151:
393-396.
Stevens JR (1982) Neuropathology of schizophrenia. Archives of general psychiatry,
39: 1131-1139.
Stoll AL et al. (1993) Shifts in diagnostic frequencies of schizophrenia and major
affective disorders at six North American psychiatric hospitals, 1972-1988. American
journal of psychiatry, 150: 1668-1673.
Strauss JS, Gift TE (1977) Choosing an approach for diagnosing schizophrenia. Archives
of general psychiatry, 34: 1248- 1253.
Stromgren E ( 1938) Beitrage zur psychiatrischen Erblehre. Acta psychiatrica et neurologica
scandinavica, (Suppl. 19).
Stromgren E (1987) Changes in the incidence of schizophrenia. British journal of
psychiatry, 150: 1-7.

Schizophrenia
Stromgren E et al. (1 989) Discussion. Acta psychiatrica scandinavica (Suppl. 348) :
167-178.
Suddath R L et al. (1989) Quantitative magnetic resonance imaging in twin pairs
discordant for schizophrenia. Schizophrenia research, 2: 129.
Sundby P, Nyhus P (1963) Major and minor psychiatric disorders in males in Oslo: an
epidemiological study. Acta psychiatrica scandinavica, 39: 519-547.
Surya NC et al. (1964) Mental morbidity in Pondicherry ( 1962-1963). Transaction ( A l l
Indian Insitute of Mental Health, Bangalore), 4: 50-6 1.
Takei N et al. (1994) Prenatal exposure to influenza and the development of
schizophrenia: is the effect confined to females? American journal of psychiatry, 151 :
117-119.
Taylor MA (1972) Schneiderian first-rank symptoms and clinical prognostic features in
schizophrenia. Archives of general psychiatry, 26: 64-67.
Taylor MA, Abrams R (1975) The phenomenology of mania: a new look at some old
patients. Archives of general psychiatry, 29: 520-522.
Temkov I et al. (1980) Use of reported prevalence data in cross-national comparisons of
psychiatric morbidity. Social psychiatry, 3: 111-1 17.
ten Horn GHMM et al., eds. (1986) Psychiatric case registers in public health. Amsterdam,
Elsevier.
Teplin LA (1990) The prevalence of severe mental disorder among male urban jail
detainees: comparison with the Epidemiologic Catchment Area Program. ~ m e r i c a n
journal of public health, 80: 663-669.
Terry PB et al. (1987) Ethnic differences in incidence of very low birthweight and
neonatal deaths among normally formed infants. Archives of disease in childhood, 62:
709-7 1 1.
Thacore VR et al. (1975) Psychiatric morbidity in a north Indian community. British
journal of psychiatry, 126: 364-369.
Thomas CS et al. (1993) Psychiatric morbidity and compulsory admissions amongst
whites, Afro-Caribbeans, and Asians in central Manchester. British journal of
psychiatry, 163: 9 1-99.
Thurnam J (1845) Observations and essays on the statistics of insanity. London,
Simpkins, Marshall.
Tien AY (1991) Distribution of hallucinations in the population. Social psychiatry,
26: 287-292.
Tien AY, Eaton WW (1992) Psychopathologic precursors and sociodemographic
risk factors for the schizophrenia syndrome. Archives of general psychiatry, 49:
37-46.

References
Tienari P et al. (1987) Genetic and psychosocial factors in schizophrenia: the Finnish
adoptive family study. Schizophrenia bulletin, 13: 477-484.
Torrey EF (1980) Schizophrenia and civilization. New York, Jason Aronson.
Torrey EF (1987) Prevalence studies in schizophrenia. British journal of psychiatry, 150: 598-608.
Torrey EF (1989) Schizophrenia: fixed incidence or fixed thinking? Psychological
medicine, 19: 285-287.
Torrey EF et al. (1977) Seasonality of schizophrenic births in the United States. Archives
of general psychiatry, 34: 1065- 1070.
Torrey EF et al. (1984) Endemic psychosis in western Ireland. American journal of
psychiatry, 141: 966-969.
Torrey EF et al. (1988) Schizophrenic births and viral diseases in two states.
Schizophrenia research, 1: 73-77.
Tramer M (1929) ~ b e die
r biologische Bedeutung des Geburtsmonates, insbesondere
fur die Psychoseerkrankung. Schweizer Archiv fur Neurologie und Psychiatric, 24: 17-24.
Tsugawa B (1942) Daitoshi ni okeru seishin-shikkan no hassei-hindo ni kansuru
kenkyii. Seishin shinnkei gaku zasshi, 47: 204.
Turner RJ, Wagenfeld M O (1967) Occupational mobility and schizophrenia: an
assessment of the social causation and social selection hypotheses. American sociological review, 32: 104-1 13.
Uchimura Y (1940) Hachijo-jima ni okeru seishin-shikkan no hassei-hindo ni kansuru
kenkyii. Minzoku eisei, 10: 1.
Uchimura Y et al. (1942) Eine weitere vergleichend psychiatrische und erbpathologische Untersuchung auf einer japanischen Insel. Japanesejournal of health and human
ecology, 10: 1-151.
Vaisanen E ( 1975) Psychiatric disorders in Finland. Acta psychiatrica scandinavica (Suppl.
263): 22-33.
Van Horn JD, McManus IC (1992) Ventricular enlargement in schizophrenia: a metaanalysis of studies of the ventricle: brain ratio (VBR). British journal ofpsychiatry, 160:
687-697.
van OSJ et al. (1993) Schizophrenia sans frontikres: concepts of schizophrenia among
French and British psychiatrists. British medicaljournal, 307: 489-492.
Varga E (1966) Changes in the symptomatology of psychotic patterns. Budapest, Akademiai
Kiado.
Vazquez-Barquero JL et al. (1987) A community mental health survey in Cantabria: a
general description of morbidity. Psychological medicine, 17: 227-241.

Schizophrenia
Verghese A et al. (1973) A social and psychiatric study of a representative group of
families in Vellore town. Indian journal of medical research, 6 1: 608-620.
Videbech T et al. (1974) Endogenous psychoses and season of birth. Acta psychiatrica
scandinavica, 50: 202-2 18.
Von Korff M et al. (1991) Prevalence of treated and untreated DSM-I11 schizophrenia.
Results of a two-stage community survey. Journal of nervous and mental disease, 173:
577-581.
Waddington JL, Youssef HA (1994) Evidence for a gender-specific decline in the rate of
schizophrenia in rural Ireland over a 50-year period. Britishjournal ofpsychiatry, 164:
171-176.
Walker EF, Lewine RRJ (1993) Sampling biases in studies of gender and schizophrenia. Schizophrenia bulletin, 19: 1-7.
Walsh D (1969) Mental illness in Dublin: first admissions. British journal of psychiatry,
115: 449-456.
Walsh D (1976) Two and two make five: multifactoriogenesis in mental illness in
Ireland. Journal of the Irish Medical Association, 69: 417-422.
Walsh D, Walsh B (1970) Mental illness in the Republic of Ireland: first admissions.
Journal of the Irish Medical Association, 63: 365-370.
Walsh D et al. (1980) The treated prevalence of mental illness in the Republic of
Ireland: the three county case register study. Psychological medicine, 10: 465-470.
Warner R (1983) Recovery from schizophrenia in the Third World. Psychiatry, 46:
197-212.
Warner R (1985) Recovery from schizophrenia: psychiatry and political economy. London,
Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Warner R (1994) Recovery from schizophrenia, 2nd ed. London, Routledge.
Warthen FJ et al. (1967) Diagnosed schizophrenia in Maryland. In: Monroe R R et al.,
eds. Psychiatric epidemiology and mental health planning, Washington, American Psychiatric Press, pp. 149-1 70.
Watson CG et al. (1984) Schizophrenic birth seasonality in relation to the incidence
of infectious diseases and temperature extremes. Archives of general psychiatry, 4 1:
85-90.
Weinberger DR, Kleinman J E (1986) Observations on the brain in schizophrenia. In:
Frances A J , Hales R E , eds. Psychiatry update: American Psychiatric
Association annual review. Volume 5. Washington, DC, American Psychiatric Press,
pp. 42-67.
Weissman MM, Myers JK (1980) Psychiatric disorders in a U.S. community. The

References
application of research diagnostic criteria to a resurveyed community sample. Acta
psychiatrica scandinavica, 62: 99- 111.
Wells EJ et al. (1989) Christchurch psychiatric epidemiology study. Part I: Methodology and lifetime prevalence for specific psychiatric disorders. Australian and N e w
Xealand journal of psychiatry, 23: 3 15-326.
Wender PH et al. (1974) Cross-fostering: a research strategy for clarifying the role of
genetic and experiential factors in the etiology of schizophrenia. Archives of general
psychiatry, 30: 121-128.
Wessely S et al. (1991) Schizophrenia and Afro-Caribbeans: a case-control study.
British journal of psychiatry, 159: 795-801.
WHO (1973) The International Pilot Study of Schiiophrenia. Geneva, World Health
Organization (WHO Offset Publication, No. 2).
WHO (1979) Schizophrenia: an international follow-up study. Chichester, Wiley.
WHO (1992) The ZCD-l0 Classification of Mental and Behavioural Disorders. Clinical
descriptions and diagnostic guidelines. Geneva, World Health Organization.
Widerlov B et al. (1989) Epidemiology of long-term functional psychosis in three
different areas in Stockholm County. Acta psychiatrica scandinavica, 80: 40-46.
Wig NN, Parhee R (1989) Acute and transient psychoses: a view from the
developing countries. In: Mezzich JE, von Cranach M, eds. International classification
in psychiatry: unity and diversity, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, pp.
115-121.
Wijesinghe CP et al. (1978) Survey ofpsychiatric morbidity in a semi-urban population
in Sri Lanka. Acta psychiatrica scandinavica, 58: 41 3-441.
Wing JK, Fryers T (1976) Statistics from the Camberwell and SaEford psychiatric registers
1964-1974. London, Institute of Psychiatry.
Wing JK et al. (1967) The use of psychiatric services in three urban areas: an
international case register study. Social psychiatry, 2: 158-1 67.
Wing JK et al. (1974) Measurement and diagnosis of psychiatric symptoms. London,
Cambridge University Press.
Wing JK et al. (1990) SCAN: Schedules for clinical assessment in neuropsychiatry.
Archives of general psychiatry, 47: 589-593.
Wittchen H U et al. (1991) Cross-cultural feasibility, reliability and sources of variance
of the Composite International Diagnostic Interview (CIDI). British journal of
psychiatry, 159: 645-653.
Wulff E (1967) Psychiatrischer Bericht aus Vietnam. In: Petrilowitsch N, ed. Beitrage
zur vergleichenden Psychiatrie. Basel, Karger, pp. 1-84.

Schizophrenia
Youssef HA et al. (1991) Evidence for geographical variations in the prevalence of
schizophrenia in rural Ireland. Archives of general psychiatry, 48: 254-258.
Zharikov NM (1968) Epidemiological study of mental illness in the U.S.S.R. Social
psychiatry, 3: 135-1 38.
Zimmerman-Tansella C et al. (1985) Bringing into action the psychiatric reform in
South-Verona: a five year experience. Acta psychiatrica scandinavica, 3 16 (Suppl.):
71-86.

ANNEX 1

Clinical descriptions and diagnostic
guidelines1

F20-F29 Schizophrenia, schizotypal and delusional disorders
Schizophrenia is the commonest and most important disorder of this group.
Schizotypal disorder possesses many of the characteristic features of schizophrenic disorders and is probably genetically related to them; however, the
hallucinations, delusions, and gross behavioural disturbances of schizophrenia
itself are absent and so this disorder does not always come to medical attention.
Most of the delusional disorders are probably unrelated to schizophrenia,
although they may be difficult to distinguish clinically, particularly in their
early stages. They form a heterogeneous and poorly understood collection of
disorders, which can conveniently be divided according to their typical
duration into a group of persistent delusional disorders and a larger group of
acute and transient psychotic disorders. The latter appear to be particularly
common in developing countries. The subdivisions listed here should be
regarded as provisional. Schizoaffective disorders have been retained in this
section in spite of their controversial nature.

F20 Schizophrenia
The schizophrenic disorders are characterized in general by fundamental and
characteristic distortions of thinking and perception, and by inappropriate or
blunted affect. Clear consciousness and intellectual capacity are usually
maintained, although certain cognitive deficits may evolve in the course of
time. The disturbance involves the most basic functions that give the normal
person a feeling of individuality, uniqueness, and self-direction. The most
intimate thoughts, feelings, and acts are often felt to be known to or shared by
others, and explanatory delusions may develop, to the effect that natural or
supernatural forces are at work to influence the afflicted individual's thoughts
and actions in ways that are often bizarre. The individual may see himself or
herself as the pivot of all that happens. Hallucinations, especially auditory, are
common and may comment on the individual's behaviour or thoughts.
Perception is frequently disturbed in other ways: colours or sounds may seem
unduly vivid or altered in quality, and irrelevant features of ordinary things

' Reproduced from: The ICD-l0 Classijication of Mental and Behavioural Disorders: clinical
descriptions and diagnostic guidelines. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1992, pp. 86-109.
11 1

l

Schizophrenia

may appear more important than the whole object or situation. Perplexity is
also common early on and frequently leads to a belief that everyday situations
possess a special, usually sinister, meaning intended uniquely for the individual.
In the characteristic schizophrenic disturbance of thinking, peripheral and
irrelevant features of a total concept, which are inhibited in normal directed
mental activity, are brought to the fore and utilized in place of those that are
relevant and appropriate to the situation. Thus thinking becomes vague,
elliptical, and obscure, and its expression in speech sometimes incomprehensible. Breaks and interpolations in the train of thought are frequent, and
thoughts may seem to be withdrawn by some outside agency. Mood is
characteristically shallow, capricious, or incongruous. Ambivalence and disturbance of volition may appear as inertia, negativism, or stupor. Catatonia
may be present. The onset may be acute, with seriously disturbed behaviour, or
insidious, with a gradual development of odd ideas and conduct. The course of
the disorder shows equally great variation and is by no means inevitably
chronic or deteriorating (the course is specified by five-character categories). In
a proportion of cases, which may vary in different cultures and populations, the
outcome is complete, or nearly complete, recovery. The sexes are approximately equally affected but the onset tends to be later in women.
Although no strictly pathognomonic symptoms can be identified, for
practical purposes it is useful to divide the above symptoms into groups that
have special importance for the diagnosis and often occur together, such as:
(a) thought echo, thought insertion or withdrawal, and thought broadcasting;
(b) delusions of control, influence, or passivity, clearly referred to body or limb
movements or specific thoughts, actions, or sensations; delusional perception;
(c) hallucinatory voices giving a running commentary on the patient's behaviour, or discussing the patient among themselves, or other types of
hallucinatory voices coming from some part of the body;
(d) persistent delusions of other kinds that are culturally inappropriate and
completely impossible, such as religious or political identity, or superhuman powers and abilities (e.g. being able to control the weather, or
being in communication with aliens from another world);
(e) persistent hallucinations in any modality, when accompanied either by
fleeting or half-formed delusions without clear affective content, or by
persistent over-valued ideas, or when occurring every day for weeks or
months on end;
(f) breaks or interpolations in the train of thought, resulting in incoherence or
irrelevant speech, or neologisms;
(g) catatonic behaviour, such as excitement, posturing, or waxy flexibility,
negativism, mutism, and stupor;
(h) "negative" symptoms such as marked apathy, paucity of speech, and
blunting or incongruity of emotional responses, usually resulting in social
withdrawal and lowering of social performance; it must be clear that these
are not due to depression or to neuroleptic medication;

I

,

,

~

l

Annex l

(i) a significant and consistent change in the overall quality of some aspects of
personal behaviour, manifest as loss of interest, aimlessness, idleness, a selfabsorbed attitude, and social withdrawal.

Diagnostic guidelines
The normal requirement for a diagnosis of schizophrenia is that a minimum of
one very clear symptom (and usually two or more if less clear-cut) belonging to
any one of the groups listed as (a) to (d) above, or symptoms from at least two of
the groups referred to as (e) to (h),should have been clearly present for most of
the time during aperiod of l month or more. Conditions meeting such symptomatic
requirements but of duration less than 1 month (whether treated or not) should
be diagnosed in the first instance as acute schizophrenia-like psychotic disorder
(F23.2) and reclassified as schizophrenia if the symptoms persist for longer
periods.
Viewed retrospectively, it may be clear that a prodromal phase in which
symptoms and behaviour, such as loss of interest in work, social activities, and
personal appearance and hygiene, together with generalized anxiety and mild
degrees of depression and preoccupation, preceded the onset of psychotic
symptoms by weeks or even months. Because of the difficulty in timing onset,
the l-month duration criterion applies only to the specific symptoms listed
above and not to any prodromal nonpsychotic phase.
The diagnosis of schizophrenia should not be made in the presence of
extensive depressive or manic symptoms unless it is clear that schizophrenic
symptoms antedated the affective disturbance. If both schizophrenic and
affective symptoms develop together and are evenly balanced, the diagnosis of
schizoaffective disorder (F25.-) should be made, even if the schizophrenic
symptoms by themselves would have justified the diagnosis of schizophrenia.
Schizophrenia should not be diagnosed in the presence of overt brain disease or
during states of drug intoxication or withdrawal. Similar disorders developing
in the presence of epilepsy or other brain disease should be coded under F06.2
and those induced by drugs under Flx.5.

Pattern of course
The course of schizophrenic disorders can be classified by using the following
five-character codes:

F20.xO Continuous
F20.xl Episodic with progressive deficit
F20.x2 Episodic with stable deficit
F20.x3 Episodic remittent
F20.x4 Incomplete remission
F20.x5 Complete remission
F20.x8 Other
F20.x9 Period of observation less than one year

Schizophrenia
F20.0 Paranoid schizophrenia

This is the commonest type of schizophrenia in most parts of the world. The
clinical picture is dominated by relatively stable, often paranoid, delusions,
usually accompanied by hallucinations, particularly of the auditory variety,
and perceptual disturbances. Disturbances of affect, volition, and speech, and
catatonic symptoms, are not prominent.
Examples of the most common paranoid symptoms are:
(a) delusions of persecution, reference, exalted birth, special mission, bodily
change, or jealousy;
(b) hallucinatory voices that threaten the patient or give commands, or
auditory hallucinations without verbal form, such as whistling, humming,
or laughing;
(c) hallucinations of smell or taste, or of sexual or other bodily sensations;
visual hallucinations may occur but are rarely predominant.
Thought disorder may be obvious in acute states, but if so it does not
prevent the typical delusions or hallucinations from being described clearly.
Affect is usually less blunted than in other varieties of schizophrenia, but a
minor degree of incongruity is common, as are mood disturbances such as
irritability, sudden anger, fearfulness, and suspicion. "Negative" symptoms
such as blunting of affect and impaired volition are often present but do not
dominate the clinical picture.
The course of paranoid schizophrenia may be episodic, with partial or
complete remissions, or chronic. In chronic cases, the florid symptoms persist
over years and it is difficult to distinguish discrete episodes. The onset tends to
be later than in the hebephrenic and catatonic forms.
Diagnostic guidelines
The general criteria for a diagnosis of schizophrenia (see introduction to F20
above) must be satisfied. In addition, hallucinations and/or delusions must be
prominent, and disturbances of affect, volition and speech, and catatonic
symptoms must be relatively inconspicuous. The hallucinations will usually be
of the kind described in (b) and (c) above. Delusions can be of almost any kind
but delusions of control, influence, or passivity, and persecutory beliefs of
various kinds are the most characteristic.

Includes: paraphrenic schizophrenia
Dzfferential diagnosis. It is important to exclude epileptic and drug-induced
psychoses, and to remember that persecutory delusions might carry little
diagnostic weight in people from certain countries or cultures.
Excludes: involutional paranoid state (F22.8)
paranoia (F22.0)
F20.1 Hebephrenic schizophrenia

A form of schizophrenia in which affective changes are prominent, delusions
and hallucinations fleeting and fragmentary, behaviour irresponsible and

Annex I

l

unpredictable, and mannerisms common. The mood is shallow and inappropriate and often accompanied by giggling or self-satisfied, self-absorbed
smiling, or by a lofty manner, grimaces, mannerisms, pranks, hypochondriacal
complaints, and reiterated phrases. Thought is disorganized and speech
rambling and incoherent. There is a tendency to remain solitary, and
behaviour seems empty of purpose and feeling. This form of schizophrenia
usually starts between the ages of 15 and 25 years and tends to have a poor
prognosis because of the rapid development of "negative" symptoms, particularly flattening of affect and loss of volition.
In addition, disturbances of affect and volition, and thought disorder are
usually prominent. Hallucinations and delusions may be present but are not
usually prominent. Drive and determination are lost and goals abandoned, so
that the patient's behaviour becomes characteristically aimless and empty of
purpose. A superficial and manneristic preoccupation with religion, philosophy, and other abstract themes may add to the listener's difficulty in following
the train of thought.
Diagnostic guidelines
The general criteria for a diagnosis of schizophrenia (see introduction to F20
above) must be satisfied. Hebephrenia should normally be diagnosed for the
first time only in adolescents or young adults. The premorbid personality is
characteristically, but not necessarily, rather shy and solitary. For a confident
diagnosis of hebephrenia, a period of 2 or 3 months of continuous observation is
usually necessary, in order to ensure that the characteristic behaviours
described above are sustained.
Includes: disorganized schizophrenia
hebephrenia
F20.2 Catatonic schizophrenia

Prominent psychomotor disturbances are essential and dominant features and
may alternate between extremes such as hyperkinesis and stupor, or automatic
obedience and negativism. Constrained attitudes and postures may be maintained for long periods. Episodes of violent excitement may be a striking feature
of the condition.
For reasons that are poorly understood, catatonic schizophrenia is now
rarely seen in industrial countries, though it remains common elsewhere. These
catatonic phenomena may be combined with a dream-like (oneiroid) state with
vivid scenic hallucinations.

1

Diagnostic guidelines
The general criteria for a diagnosis of schizophrenia (see introduction to F20
above) must be satisfied. Transitory and isolated catatonic symptoms may
occur in the context of any other subtype ofschizophrenia, but for a diagnosis of
catatonic schizophrenia one or more of the following behaviours should
dominate the clinical picture:

Schizophrenia

(a) stupor (marked decrease in reactivity to the environment and in spontaneous movements and activity) or mutism;
(b) excitement (apparently purposeless motor activity, not influenced by
external stimuli);
(c) posturing (voluntary assumption and maintenance of inappropriate or
bizarre postures);
(d) negativism (an apparently motiveless resistance to all instructions or
attempts to be moved, or movement in the opposite direction);
(e) rigidity (maintenance of a rigid posture against efforts to be moved);
(f) waxy flexibility (maintenance of limbs and body in externally imposed
positions); and
(g) other symptoms such as command automatism (automatic compliance
with instructions), and perseveration of words and phrases.
In uncommunicative patients with behavioural manifestations of catatonic
disorder, the diagnosis of schizophrenia may have to be provisional until
adequate evidence of the presence of other symptoms is obtained. It is also vital
to appreciate that catatonic symptoms are not diagnostic of schizophrenia. A
catatonic symptom or symptoms may also be provoked by brain disease,
metabolic disturbances, or alcohol and drugs, and may also occur in mood
disorders.

Includes: catatonic stupor
schizophrenic catalepsy
schizophrenic catatonia
schizophrenic flexibilitas cerea
F20.3 Undifferentiated schizophrenia

Conditions meeting the general diagnostic criteria for schizophrenia (see
introduction to F20 above) but not conforming to any of the above subtypes
(F20.0-F20.2), or exhibiting the features of more than one of them without a
clear predominance of a particular set of diagnostic characteristics. This rubric
should be used only for psychotic conditions (i.e. residual schizophrenia, F20.5,
and post-schizophrenic depression, F20.4, are excluded) and after an attempt
has been made to classify the condition into one of the three preceding
categories.
Diagnostic guidelines
This category should be reserved for disorders that:
(a) meet the diagnostic criteria for schizophrenia;
(b) do not satisfy the criteria for the paranoid, hebephrenic, or catatonic
subtypes;
(c) do not satisfy the criteria for residual schizophrenia or post-schizophrenic
depression.

Includes: atypical schizophrenia

Annex l
F20.4 Post-schizophrenic depression

A depressive episode, which may be prolonged, arising in the aftermath of a
schizophrenic illness. Some schizophrenic symptoms must still be present but
no longer dominate the clinical picture. These persisting schizophrenic symptoms may be "positive" or "negative", though the latter are more common. It
is uncertain, and immaterial to the diagnosis, to what extent the depressive
symptoms have merely been uncovered by the resolution of earlier psychotic
symptoms (rather than being a new development) or are an intrinsic part of
schizophrenia rather than a psychological reaction to it. They are rarely
sufficiently severe or extensive to meet criteria for a severe depressive episode
(F32.2 and F32.3), and it is often difficult to decide which of the patient's
symptoms are due to depression and which to neuroleptic medication or to the
impaired volition and affective flattening of schizophrenia itself. This depressive disorder is associated with an increased risk of suicide.
Diagnostic guidelines
The diagnosis should be made only if:
(a) the patient has had a schizophrenic illness meeting the general criteria for
schizophrenia (see introduction to F20 above) within the past 12 months;
(b) some schizophrenic symptoms are still present; and
(c) the depressive symptoms are prominent and distressing, fulfilling at least
the criteria for a depressive episode (F32.-), and have been present for at
least 2 weeks.
If the patient no longer has any schizophrenic symptoms, a depressive
episode should be diagnosed (F32.-). If schizophrenic symptoms are still florid
and prominent, the diagnosis should remain that of the appropriate schizophrenic subtype (F20.0, F20.1, F20.2, or F20.3).
F20.5 Residual schizophrenia

A chronic stage in the development of a schizophrenic disorder in which there
has been a clear progression from an early stage (comprising one or more
episodes with psychotic symptoms meeting the general criteria for schizophrenia described above) to a later stage characterized by long-term, though
not necessarily irreversible, "negative" symptoms.
Diagnostic guidelines
For a confident diagnosis, the following requirements should be met:

(a) prominent "negative" schizophrenic symptoms, i.e. psychomotor slowing,
underactivity, blunting of affect, passivity and lack of initiative, poverty of
quantity or content of speech, poor nonverbal communication by facial
expression, eye contact, voice modulation, and posture, poor self-care and
social performance;
(b) evidence in the past of at least one clear-cut psychotic episode meeting the
diagnostic criteria for schizophrenia;
(c) a period of at least l year during which the intensity and frequency of florid

Schizophrenia

symptoms such as delusions and hallucinations have been minimal or
substantially reduced and the "negative" schizophrenic syndrome has been
present;
(d) absence of dementia or other organic brain disease or disorder, and of
chronic depression or institutionalism sufficient to explain the negative
impairments.
If adequate information about the patient's previous history cannot be
obtained, and it therefore cannot be established that criteria for schizophrenia
have been met at some time in the past, it may be necessary to make a
provisional diagnosis of residual schizophrenia.

Includes: chronic undifferentiated schizophrenia
"Restzustand"
schizophrenic residual state
F20.6 Simple schizophrenia

An uncommon disorder in which there is an insidious but progressive development of oddities of conduct, inability to meet the demands of society, and
decline in total performance. Delusions and hallucinations are not evident, and
the disorder is less obviously psychotic than the hebephrenic, paranoid, and
catatonic subtypes of schizophrenia. The characteristic "negative" features of
residual schizophrenia (e.g. blunting of affect, loss of volition) develop without
being preceded by any overt psychotic symptoms. With increasing social
impoverishment, vagrancy may ensue and the individual may then become
self-absorbed, idle, and aimless.
Diagnostic guidelines
Simple schizophrenia is a difficult diagnosis to make with any confidence
because it depends on establishing the slowly progressive development of the
characteristic "negative" symptoms of residual schizophrenia (see F20.5
above) without any history of hallucinations, delusions, or other manifestations
of an earlier psychotic episode, and with significant changes in personal
behaviour, manifest as a marked loss of interest, idleness, and social withdrawal.

Includes: schizophrenia simplex
F20.8 Other schizophrenia

Includes: cenesthopathic schizophrenia
schizophreniform disorder NOS
Excludes: acute schizophrenia-like disorder (F23.2)
cyclic schizophrenia (F25.2)
latent schizophrenia (F23.2)
F20.9 Schizophrenia, unspecified

Annex l

F21 Schizotypal disorder
A disorder characterized by eccentric behaviour and anomalies of thinking and
affect which resemble those seen in schizophrenia, though no definite and
characteristic schizophrenic anomalies have occurred at any stage. There is no
dominant or typical disturbance, but any of the following may be present:
(a) inappropriate or constricted affect (the individual appears cold and aloof);
(b) behaviour or appearance that is odd, eccentric, or peculiar;
(c) poor rapport with others and a tendency to social withdrawal;
(d) odd beliefs or magical thinking, influencing behaviour and inconsistent
with subcultural norms;
(e) suspiciousness or paranoid ideas;
(f) obsessive ruminations without inner resistance, often with dysmorphophobic, sexual or aggressive contents;
(g) unusual perceptual experiences including somatosensory (bodily) or other
illusions, depersonalization or derealization;
(h) vague, circumstantial, metaphorical, overelaborate, or stereotyped thinking, manifested by odd speech or in other ways, without gross incoherence;
(i) occasional transient quasi-psychotic episodes with intense illusions, auditory or other hallucinations, and delusion-like ideas, usually occurring
without external provocation.
The disorder runs a chronic course with fluctuations of intensity. Occasionally it evolves into overt schizophrenia. There is no definite onset and its
evolution and course are usually those of a personality disorder. It is more
common in individuals related to schizophrenics and is believed to be part of
the genetic "spectrum" of schizophrenia.
Diagnostic guidelines
This diagnostic rubric is not recommended for general use because it is not
clearly demarcated either from simple schizophrenia or from schizoid or
paranoid personality disorders. If the term is used, three or four of the typical
features listed above should have been present, continuously or episodically, for
at least 2 years. The individual must never have met criteria for schizophrenia
itself. A history of schizophrenia in a first-degree relative gives additional
weight to the diagnosis but is not a prerequisite.

Includes: borderline schizophrenia
latent schizophrenia
latent schizophrenic reaction
prepsychotic schizophrenia
prodromal schizophrenia
pseudoneurotic schizophrenia
pseudopsychopathic schizophrenia
schizotypal personality disorder

Schizophrenia

Excludes: Asperger's syndrome (F84.5)
schizoid personality disorder (F60.1)

F22 Persistent delusional disorders
This group includes a variety of disorders in which long-standing delusions
constitute the only, or the most conspicuous, clinical characteristic and which
cannot be classified as organic, schizophrenic, or affective. They are probably
heterogeneous, and have uncertain relationships to schizophrenia. The relative
importance of genetic factors, personality characteristics, and life circumstances in their genesis is uncertain and probably variable.
F22.0 Delusional disorder

This group of disorders is characterized by the development either of a single
delusion or of a set of related delusions which are usually persistent and
sometimes lifelong. The delusions are highly variable in content. Often they are
persecutory, hypochondriacal, or grandiose, but they may be concerned with
litigation or jealousy, or express a conviction that the individual's body is
misshapen, or that others think that he or she smells or is homosexual. Other
psychopathology is characteristically absent, but depressive symptoms may be
present intermittently, and olfactory and tactile hallucinations may develop in
some cases. Clear and persistent auditory hallucinations (voices), schizophrenic
symptoms such as delusions of control and marked blunting of affect, and
definite evidence of brain disease are all incompatible with this diagnosis.
However, occasional or transitory auditory hallucinations, particularly in
elderly patients, do not rule out this diagnosis, provided that they are not
typically schizophrenic and form only a small part of the overall clinical
picture. Onset is commonly in middle age but sometimes, particularly in the
case ofbeliefs about having a misshapen body, in early adult life. The content of
the delusion, and the timing of its emergence, can often be related to the
individual's life situation, e.g. persecutory delusions in members of minorities.
Apart from actions and attitudes directly related to the delusion or delusional
system, affect, speech, and behaviour are normal.
Diagnostic guidelines
Delusions constitute the most conspicuous or the only clinical characteristic.
They must be present for at least 3 months and be clearly personal rather than
subcultural. Depressive symptoms or even a full-blown depressive episode
(F32.-) may be present intermittently, provided that the delusion persists at
times when there is no disturbance of mood. There must be no evidence of brain
disease, no or only occasional auditory hallucinations, and no history of
schizophrenic symptoms (delusions of control, thought broadcasting, etc.).

Includes: paranoia
paranoid psychosis

Annex I
paranoid state
paraphrenia (late)
sensitiver Beziehungswahn

Excludes: paranoid personality disorder (F60.0)
psychogenic paranoid psychosis (F23.3)
paranoid reaction (F23.3)
paranoid schizophrenia (F20.0)
F22.8 Other persistent delusional disorders

This is a residual category for persistent delusional disorders that do not meet
the criteria for delusional disorder (F22.0). Disorders in which delusions are
accompanied by persistent hallucinatory voices or by schizophrenic symptoms
that are insufficient to meet criteria for schizophrenia (F20.-) should be coded
here. Delusional disorders that have lasted for less than 3 months should,
however, be coded, at least temporarily, under F23.-.

Includes: delusional dysmorphophobia
involutional paranoid state
paranoia querulans
F22.9 Persistent delusional disorder, unspecified

F23 Acute and transient psychotic disorders
Systematic clinical information that would provide definitive guidance on the
classification of acute psychotic disorders is not yet available, and the limited
data and clinical tradition that must therefore be used instead do not give rise to
concepts that can be clearly defined and separated from each other. In the
absence of a tried and tested multiaxial system, the method used here to avoid
diagnostic confusion is to construct a diagnostic sequence that reflects the order
of priority given to selected key features of the disorder. The order of priority
used here is:
(a) an acute onset (within 2 weeks) as the defining feature of the whole group;
(b) the presence of typical syndromes;
(c) the presence of associated acute stress.
The classification is nevertheless arranged so that those who do not agree
with this order of priority can still identify acute psychotic disorders with each
of these specified features.
It is also recommended that whenever possible a further subdivision of onset
be used, if applicable, for all the disorders of this group. Acute onset is defined as a
change from a state without psychotic features to a clearly abnormal psychotic
state, within a period of 2 weeks or less. There is some evidence that acute onset
is associated with a good outcome, and it may be that the more abrupt the
onset, the better the outcome. It is therefore recommended that, whenever
appropriate, abrupt onset (within 48 hours or less) be specified.

Schizophrenia

The ppical syndromes that have been selected are first, the rapidly changing
and variable state, called here "polymorphic", that has been given prominence
in acute psychotic states in several countries, and second, the presence of typical
schizophrenic symptoms.
Associated acute stress can also be specified, with a fifth character if desired, in
view of its traditional linkage with acute psychosis. The limited evidence
available, however, indicates that a substantial proportion of acute psychotic
disorders arise without associated stress, and provision has therefore been made
for the presence or the absence of stress to be recorded. Associated acute stress is
taken to mean that the first psychotic symptoms occur within about 2 weeks of
one or more events that would be regarded as stressful to most people in similar
circumstances, within the culture of the person concerned. Typical events
would be bereavement, unexpected loss of partner or job, marriage, or the
psychological trauma of combat, terrorism, and torture. Long-standing difficulties or problems should not be included as a source of stress in this context.
Complete recovery usually occurs within 2 to 3 months, often within a few
weeks or even days, and only a small proportion of patients with these disorders
develop persistent and disabling states. Unfortunately, the present state of
knowledge does not allow the early prediction of that small proportion of
patients who will not recover rapidly.
These clinical descriptions and diagnostic guidelines are written on the
assumption that they will be used by clinicians who may need to make a
diagnosis when having to assess and treat patients within a few days or weeks of
the onset of the disorder, not knowing how long the disorder will last. A number
of reminders about the time limits and transition from one disorder to another
have therefore been included, so as to alert those recording the diagnosis to the
need to keep them up to date.
The nomenclature of these acute disorders is as uncertain as their nosological status, but an attempt has been made to use simple and familiar terms.
"Psychotic disorder" is used as a term of convenience for all the members of this
group with an additional qualifying term indicating the major defining feature
of each separate type as it appears in the sequence noted above.
Diagnostic guidelines
None of the disorders in the group satisfies the criteria for either manic (F30.-)
or depressive (F32.-) episodes, although emotional changes and individual
affective symptoms may be' prominent from time to time.
These disorders are also defined by the absence oforganic causation, such as
states of concussion, delirium, or dementia. Perplexity, preoccupation, and
inattention to the immediate conversation are often present, but if they are so
marked or persistent as to suggest delirium or dementia of organic cause, the
diagnosis should be delayed until investigation or observation has clarified this
point. Similarly, disorders in F23.- should not be diagnosed in the presence of
obvious intoxication by drugs or alcohol. However, a recent minor increase in
the consumption of, for instance, alcohol or marijuana, with no evidence of

Annex l

severe intoxication or disorientation, should not rule out the diagnosis of one of
these acute psychotic disorders.
It is important to note that the 48-hour and the 2-week criteria are not put
forward as the times of maximum severity and disturbance, but as times by
which the psychotic symptoms have become obvious and disruptive of at least
some aspects of daily life and work. The peak disturbance may be reached later
in both instances; the symptoms and disturbance have only to be obvious by the
stated times, in the sense that they will usually have brought the patient into
contact with some form of helping or medical agency. Prodromal periods of
anxiety, depression, social withdrawal, or mildly abnormal behaviour do not
qualify for inclusion in these periods of time.
A fifth character may be used to indicate whether or not the acute psychotic
disorder is associated with acute stress:
F23.xO Without associated acute stress
F23.xl With associated acute stress
F23.0 Acute polymorphic psychotic disorder without symptoms of schizophrenia

An acute psychotic disorder in which hallucinations, delusions, and perceptual
disturbances are obvious but markedly variable, changing from day to day or
even from hour to hour. Emotional turmoil, with intense transient feelings of
happiness and ecstasy or anxieties and irritability, is also frequently present.
This polymorphic and unstable, changing clinical picture is characteristic, and
even though individual affective or psychotic symptoms may at times be
present, the criteria for manic episode (F30.-), depressive episode (F32.-), or
schizophrenia (F20.-) are not fulfilled. This disorder is particularly likely to
have an abrupt onset (within 48 hours) and a rapid resolution ofsymptoms; in a
large proportion of cases there is no obvious precipitating stress.
If the symptoms persist for more than 3 months, the diagnosis should be
changed. (Persistent delusional disorder (F22.-) or other nonorganic psychotic
disorder (F28) is likely to be the most appropriate.)
Diagnostic guidelines
For a definite diagnosis:

(a) the onset must be acute (from a nonpsychotic state to a clearly psychotic
state within 2 weeks or less);
(b) there must be several types of hallucination or delusion, changing in both
type and intensity from day to day or within the same day;
(c) there should be a similarly varying emotional state; and
(d) in spite of the variety of symptoms, none should be present with sufficient
consistency to fulfil the criteria for schizophrenia (F20.-) or for manic or
depressive episode (F30.- or F32.-).
Includes: bouffke dklirante without symptoms of schizophrenia or unspecified
cycloid psychosis without symptoms of schizophrenia or unspecified

Schizobhrenia
F23.1 Acute polymorphic psychotic disorder with symptoms of schizophrenia

An acute psychotic disorder which meets the descriptive criteria for acute
polymorphic psychotic disorder (F23.0) but in which typically schizophrenic
symptoms are also consistently present.
Diagnostic guidelines
For a definite diagnosis, criteria (a), (b), and (c) specified for acute polymorphic psychotic disorder (F23.0) must be fulfilled; in addition, symptoms
that fulfil the criteria for schizophrenia (F20.-) must have been present for
the majority of the time since the establishment of an obviously psychotic
clinical picture.
If the schizophrenic symptoms persist for more than 1 month, the diagnosis
should be changed to schizophrenia (F20.-) .

Includes: bouffte dtlirante with symptoms of schizophrenia
cycloid psychosis with symptoms of schizophrenia
F23.2 Acute schizophrenia-like psychotic disorder

An acute psychotic disorder in which the psychotic symptoms are comparatively stable and fulfil the criteria for schizophrenia (F20.-) but have lasted for
less than 1 month. Some degree of emotional variability or instability may be
present, but not to the extent described in acute polymorphic psychotic
disorder (F23.0).
Diagnostic guidelines
For a definite diagnosis:

(a) the onset of psychotic symptoms must be acute (2 weeks or less from a
nonpsychotic to a clearly psychotic state);
(b) symptoms that fulfil the criteria for schizophrenia (F20.-) must have been
present for the majority of the time since the establishment of an obviously
psychotic clinical picture;
(c) the criteria for acute polymorphic psychotic disorder are not fulfilled.
If the schizophrenic symptoms last for more than 1 month, the diagnosis should
be changed to schizophrenia (F20.-) .
Includes: acute (undifferentiated) schizophrenia
brief schizophreniform disorder
brief schizophreniform psychosis
oneirophrenia
schizophrenic reaction
Excludes: organic delusional [schizophrenia-like] disorder (F06.2)
schizophreniform disorder NOS (F20.8)
F23.3 Other acute predominantly delusional psychotic disorders

Acute psychotic disorders in which comparatively stable delusions or hallucinations are the main clinical features, but do not fulfil the criteria for

l

Annex I

schizophrenia (F20.-) . Delusions of persecution or reference are common, and
hallucinations are usually auditory (voices talking directly to the patient).
Diagnostic guidelines
For a definite diagnosis:

(a) the onset of psychotic symptoms must be acute (2 weeks or less from a
nonpsychotic to a clearly psychotic state);
(b) delusions or hallucinations must have been present for the majority of the
time since the establishment of an obviously psychotic state; and
(c) the criteria for neither schizophrenia (F20.-) nor acute polymorphic
psychotic disorder (F23.0) are fulfilled.
Ifdelusions persist for more than 3 months, the diagnosis should be changed
to persistent delusional disorder (F22.-) . If only hallucinations persist for more
than 3 months, the diagnosis should be changed to other nonorganic psychotic
disorder (F28).
Includes: paranoid reaction
psychogenic paranoid psychosis
F23.8 Other acute and transient psychotic disorders

Any other acute psychotic disorders that are unclassifiable under any other
category in F23 (such as acute psychotic states in which definite delusions or
hallucinations occur but persist for only small proportions of the time) should
be coded here. States of undifferentiated excitement should also be coded here
if more detailed information about the patient's mental state is not available,
provided that there is no evidence of an organic cause.
F23.9 Acute and transient psychotic disorder, unspecified

Includes: (brief) reactive psychosis NOS

F24 Induced delusional disorder
A rare delusional disorder shared by two or occasionally more people with close
emotional links. Only one person suffers from a genuine psychotic disorder; the
delusions are induced in the other(s) and usually disappear when the people are
separated. The psychotic illness of the dominant person is most commonly
schizophrenic, but this is not necessarily or invariably so. Both the original
delusions in the dominant person and the induced delusions are usually chronic
and either persecutory or grandiose in nature. Delusional beliefs are transmitted this way only in uncommon circumstances. Almost invariably, the people
concerned have an unusually close relationship and are isolated fi-om others by
language, culture, or geography. The individual in whom the delusions are
induced is usually dependent on or subservient to the person with the genuine
psychosis.

Schizophrenia
Diagnostic guidelines
A diagnosis of induced delusional disorder should be made only if

(a) two or more people share the same delusion or delusional system and
support one another in this belief;
(b) they have an unusually close relationship of the kind described above;
(c) there is temporal or other contextual evidence that the delusion was
induced in the passive member(s) of the pair or group by contact with the
active member.
Induced hallucinations are unusual but do not negate the diagnosis.
However, if there are reasons for believing that two people living together have
independent psychotic disorders neither should be coded here, even if some of
the delusions are shared.
Includes: folie deux
induced paranoid or psychotic disorder
symbiotic psychosis
Excludes: folie simultanke

F25 Schizoaffective disorders
These are episodic disorders in which both affective and schizophrenic
symptoms are prominent within the same episode of illness, preferably simultaneously, but at least within a few days of each other. Their relationship to
typical mood [affective] disorders (F30-F39) and to schizophrenic disorders
(F20-F24) is uncertain. They are given a separate category because they are
too common to be ignored. Other conditions in which affective symptoms are
superimposed upon or form part of a pre-existing schizophrenic illness, or in
which they coexist or alternate with other types of persistent delusional
disorders, are classified under the appropriate category in F20-F29. Moodincongruent delusions or hallucinations in affective disorders (F30.2, F3 1.2,
F31.5, F32.3, or F33.3) do not by themselves justify a diagnosis of schizoaffective disorder.
Patients who suffer from recurrent schizoaffective episodes, particularly
those whose symptoms are of the manic rather than the depressive type, usually
make a full recovery and only rarely develop a defect state.
Diagnostic guidelines

A diagnosis of schizoaffective disorder should be made only when both definite
schizophrenic and definite affective symptoms are prominent simultaneously, or
within a few days of each other, within the same episode of illness, and when, as
a consequence of this, the episode of illness does not meet criteria for either
schizophrenia or a depressive or manic episode. The term should not be applied
to patients who exhibit schizophrenic symptoms and affective symptoms only
in different episodes of illness. I t is common, for example, for a schizophrenic

Annex 1

patient to present with depressive symptoms in the aftermath of a psychotic
episode (see post-schizophrenic depression (F20.4)). Some patients have
recurrent schizoaffective episodes, which may be of the manic or depressive
type or a mixture of the two. Others have one or two schizoaffective episodes
interspersed between typical episodes of mania or depression. I n the former
case, schizoaffective disorder is the appropriate diagnosis. In the latter, the
occurrence of an occasional schizoaffective episode does not invalidate a
diagnosis of bipolar affective disorder or recurrent depressive disorder if the
clinical picture is typical in other respects.
F25.0 Schizoaffective disorder, manic type

A disorder in which schizophrenic and manic symptoms are both prominent in
the same episode of illness.The abnormality of mood usually takes the form of
elation, accompanied by increased self-esteem and grandiose ideas, but sometimes excitement or irritability are more obvious and accompanied by aggressive behaviour and persecutory ideas. In both cases there is increased energy,
overactivity, impaired concentration, and a loss of normal social inhibition.
Delusions of reference, grandeur, or persecution may be present, but other
more typically schizophrenic symptoms are required to establish the diagnosis.
People may insist, for example, that their thoughts are being broadcast or
interfered with, or that alien forces are trying
to control them, or they may
.
report hearing voices ofvaried kinds or express bizarre delusional ideas that ark
not merely grandiose or persecutory. Careful questioning is often required to
establish that an individual really is experiencing these morbid phenomena,
and not merely joking or talking in metaphors. Schizoaffective disorders, manic
type, are usually florid psychoses with an acute onset; although behaviour is
often grossly disturbed, full recovery generally occurs within a few weeks.
Diagnostic guidelines
There must be a prominent elevation of mood, or a less obvious elevation of
mood combined with increased irritability or excitement. Within the same
episode, at least one and preferably two typically schizophrenic symptoms (as
specified for schizophrenia (F20.-), diagnostic guidelines (a)-(d)) should be
clearly present.
This category should be used both for a single schizoaffective episode of the
manic type and for a recurrent disorder in which the majority of episodes are
schizoaffective, manic type.

Includes: schizoaffective psychosis, manic type
schizophreniform psychosis, manic type
F25.1 Schizoaffective disorder, depressive type

A disorder in which schizophrenic and depressive symptoms are both prominent in the same episode of illness. Depression of mood is usually accompanied
by several characteristic depressive symptoms or behavioural abnormalities
such as retardation, insomnia, loss of energy, appetite or weight, reduction of

Schizophrenia

normal interests, impairment of concentration, guilt, feelings of hopelessness,
and'suicidal thoughts. At the same time, or within the same episode, other more
typically schizophrenic symptoms are present; patients may insist, for example,
that their thoughts are being broadcast or interfered with, or that alien forces
are trying to control them. They may be convinced that they are being spied
upon or plotted against and this is not justified by their own behaviour. Voices
may be heard that are not merely disparaging or condemnatory but that talk of
killing the patient or discuss this behaviour between themselves. Schizoaffective
episodes of the depressive type are usually less florid and alarming than
schizoaffective episodes of the manic type, but they tend to last longer and the
prognosis is less favourable. Although the majority of patients recover completely, some eventually develop a schizophrenic defect.
Diagnostic guidelines
There must be prominent depression, accompanied by at least two characteristic depressive symptoms or associated behavioural abnormalities as listed for
depressive episode (F32.-); within the same episode, at least one and preferably two typically schizophrenic symptoms (as specified for schizophrenia
(F20.-), diagnostic guidelines (a)-(d)) should be clearly present.
This category should be used both for a single schizoaffective episode,
depressive type, and for a recurrent disorder in which the majority of episodes
are schizoaffective, depressive type.

Includes: schizoaffective psychosis, depressive type
schizophreniform psychosis, depressive type
F25.2 Schizoaffective disorder, mixed type

l

Disorders in which symptoms of schizophrenia (F20.-) coexist with those of
a mixed bipolar affective disorder (F31.6) should be coded here.

Includes: cyclic schizophrenia
mixed schizophrenic and affective psychosis

~

F25.8 Other schizoaffective disorders

I

F25.9 Schizoaffective disorder, unspecified

1

Includes: schizoaffective psychosis NOS

~

F28 Other nonorganic psychotic disorders
Psychotic disorders that do not meet the criteria for schizophrenia (F20.-) or
for psychotic types of mood [affective] disorders (F30-F39), and psychotic
disorders that do not meet the symptomatic criteria for persistent delusional
disorder (F22.-) should be coded here.

Includes: chronic hallucinatory psychosis NOS

Annex I

F29 Unspecified nonorganic psychosis
Includes: psychosis NOS
Excludes: mental disorder NOS (F99)
organic or symptomatic psychosis NOS (F09)

ANNEX 2

Diagnostic criteria for research'

F20-F29 Schizophrenia, schizotypal and delusional disorders
F20 Schizophrenia
This overall category includes the common varieties of schizophrenia, together
with some less common varieties and closely related disorders.
F20.0-F20.3 General criteria for paranoid, hebephrenic, catatonic, and undifferentiated schizophrenia

G1. Either a t least one of the syndromes, symptoms, and signs listed under (1)
below, or at least two of the symptoms and signs listed under (2) should be
present for most of the time during an episode of psychotic illness lasting
for at least 1 month (or at some time during most of the days).

( 1 ) At least one of the following must be present:
(a) thought echo, thought insertion or withdrawal, or thought broadcasting;
(b) delusions of control, influence, or passivity, clearly referred to
body or limb movements or specific thoughts, actions, or sensations; delusional perception;
(c) hallucinatory voices giving a running commentary on the patient's
behaviour, or discussing the patient among themselves, or other
types of hallucinatory voices coming from some part of the body;
(d) persistent delusions of other kinds that are culturally inappropriate and completely impossible (e.g. being able to control the
weather, or being in communication with aliens from another
world).

(2) Or at least two of the following:
(a) persistent hallucinations in any modality, when occurring every
day for at least 1 month, when accompanied by delgions (which
may be fleeting or half-formed) without clear affective content, or
when accompanied by persistent over-valued ideas;

'Reproduced from: T h e ICD-l0 Classijication of Mental and Behavioural Disorders: diagnostic
criteria for research. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1993, pp. 64-76.

130

Annex 2

(b) neologisms, breaks, or interpolations in the train of thought,
resulting in incoherence or irrelevant speech;
(c) catatonic behaviour, such as excitement, posturing or waxy
flexibility, negativism, mutism, and stupor;
(d) "negative" symptoms, such as marked apathy, paucity of speech,
and blunting or incongruity of emotional responses (it must be
clear that these are not due to depression or to neuroleptic
medication).
G2. Most commonly used exclusion clauses
(1) If the patient also meets criteria for manic episode (F30.-) or
depressive episode (F32.-), the criteria listed under G1 (1) and G1 (2)
above must have been met before the disturbance of mood developed.
(2) The disorder is not attributable to organic brain disease (in the sense of
F00-Fog), or to alcohol- or drug-related intoxication ( Flx.0), dependence (Flx.2), or withdrawal (Flx.3 and Flx.4).
Comments

In evaluating the presence of these abnormal subjective experiences and behaviour, special care should be taken to avoid falsepositive assessments, especially where culturally or subculturally influenced modes of expression and behaviour or a subnormal level of intelligence are involved.

Pattern of course
In view of the considerable variation of the course of schizophrenic disorders it
may be desirable (especially for research) to specify the pattern of course by using
a fifth character. Course should not usually be coded unless there has been a
period of observation of at least 1 year.

F20.xO Continuous
No remission of psychotic symptoms throughout the period of
observation.
F20.xl Episodic with progressive deficit
Progressive development of "negative" symptoms in the intervals
between psychotic episodes.
F20.x2 Episodic with stable deficit
Persident but non-progressive "negative" symptoms in the intervals between psychotic episodes.
F20.x3 Episodic remittent
Complete or virtually complete remissions between psychotic
episodes.
F20.x4 Incomplete remission
F20.x5 Complete remission
F20.x8 Other
F20.x9 Course uncertain, period of observation too short

F20.0 Paranoid schizophrenia

A. The general criteria for schizophrenia (F20.0-F20.3) must be met.
B. Delusions or hallucinations must be prominent (such as delusions of
persecution, reference, exalted birth, special mission, bodily change, or
jealousy; threatening or commanding voices, hallucinations of smell or
taste, sexual or other bodily sensations).
C. Flattening or incongruity of affect, catatonic symptoms, or incoherent
speech must not dominate the clinical picture, although they may be
present to a mild degree.
F20.1 Hebephrenic schizophrenia

A. The general criteria for schizophrenia (F20.0-F20.3) must be met.
B. Either of the following must be present:
(1) definite and sustained flattening or shallowness of affect;
(2) definite and sustained incongruity or inappropriateness of affect.
C. Either of the following must be present:
(1) behaviour that is aimless and disjointed rather than goal-directed;
(2) definite thought disorder, manifesting as speech that is disjointed,
rambling, or incoherent.
D. Hallucinations or delusions must not dominate the clinical picture, although they may be present to a mild degree.
F20.2 Catatonic schizophrenia

A. The general criteria for schizophrenia (F20.0-F20.3) must eventually be
met, although this may not be possible initially if the patient is uncommunicative.
B. For a period of at least 2 weeks one or more of the following catatonic
behaviours must be prominent:
(1) stupor (marked decrease in reactivity to the environment and reduction of spontaneous movements and activity) or mutism;
(2) excitement (apparently purposeless motor activity, not influenced by
external stimuli) ;
(3) posturing (voluntary assumption and maintenance of inappropriate or
bizarre postures);
(4) negativism (an apparently motiveless resistance to all instructions or
attempts to be moved, or movement in the opposite direction);
(5) rigidity (maintenance of a rigid posture against efforts to be moved);
(6) waxy flexibility (maintenance of limbs and body in externally imposed
positions);
(7) command automatism (automatic compliance with instructions).
F20.3 Undifferentiated schizophrenia

A. The general criteria for schizophrenia (F20.0-F20.3) must be met.
B. Either of the following must apply:
(1) insufficient symptoms to meet the criteria for any of the subtypes F20.0,
F20.1, F20.2, F20.4, or F20.5;

Annex 2

(2) so many symptoms that the criteria for more than one of the subtypes
listed in (1) above are met.
F20.4 Post-schizophrenic depression

A. The general criteria for schizophrenia (F20.0-F20.3) must have been met
within the past 12 months, but are not met at the present time.
B. One of the conditions in criterion G1 (2) a, b, c, or d for F20.0-F20.3 must
still be present.
C. The depressive symptoms must be sufficiently prolonged, severe, and
extensive to meet criteria for at least a mild depressive episode (F32.0).
F20.5 Residual schizophrenia

A. The general criteria for schizophrenia (F20.0-F20.3) must have been met
at some time in the past, but are not met at the present time.
B. At least four of the following "negative" symptoms have been present
throughout the previous 12 months:
(1) psychomotor slowing or underactivity;
(2) definite blunting of affect;
(3) passivity and lack of initiative;
(4) poverty of either the quantity or the content of speech;
(5) poor non-verbal communication by facial expression, eye contact,
voice modulation, or posture;
(6) poor social performance or self-care.
F20.6 Simple schizophrenia

A. There is slow but progressive development, over a period of at least 1 year,
of all three of the following:
(1) a significant and consistent change in the overall quality of some
aspects of personal behaviour, manifest as loss of drive and interests,
aimlessness, idleness, a self-absorbed attitude, and social withdrawal;
(2) gradual appearance and deepening of "negative" symptoms such as
marked apathy, paucity of speech, under-activity, blunting of affect,
passivity and lack of initiative, and poor non-verbal communication
(by facial expression, eye contact, voice modulation, and posture);
(3) marked decline in social, scholastic, or occupational performance.
B. At no time are there any of the symptoms referred to in criterion G1 for
F20.0-F20.3, nor are there hallucinations or well formed delusions of any
kind, i.e. the individual must never have met the criteria for any other type
of schizophrenia or for any other psychotic disorder.
C. There is no evidence of dementia or any other organic mental disorder
listed in F00-F09.
F20.8 Other schizophrenia
F20.9 Schizophrenia, unspecified

Schizophrenia

F21 Schizotypal disorder
A. The subject must have manifested at least four of the following over
a period of at least 2 years, either continuously or repeatedly:
(1) inappropriate or constricted affect, with the individual appearing cold
and aloof;
(2) behaviour or appearance that is odd, eccentric, or peculiar;
(3) poor rapport with others and a tendency to social withdrawal;
(4) odd beliefs or magical thinking, influencing behaviour and inconsistent
with subcultural norms;
(5) suspiciousness or paranoid ideas;
(6) ruminations without inner resistance, often with dysmorphophobic,
sexual, or aggressive contents;
(7) unusual perceptual experiences including somatosensory (bodily) or
other illusions, depersonalization, or derealization;
(8) vague, circumstantial, metaphorical, overelaborate, or often
stereotyped thinking, manifested by odd speech or in other ways,
without gross incoherence;
(9) occasional transient quasi-psychotic episodes with intense illusions,
auditory or other hallucinations, and delusion-like ideas, usually occurring without external provocation.
B. The subject must never have met the criteria for any disorder in
F20.-(schizophrenia).

F22 Persistent delusional disorders
F22.0 Delusional disorder

A. A delusion or a set of related delusions, other than those listed as typically
schizophrenic in criterion G l ( l ) b or d for F20.0-F20.3 (i.e. other than
completely impossible or culturally inappropriate), must be present. The
commonest examples are persecutory, grandiose, hypochondriacal, jealous
(zelotypic), or erotic delusions.
B. The delusion(s) in criterion A must be present for at least 3 months.
C. The general criteria for schizophrenia (F20.0-F20.3) are not fulfilled.
D. There must be no persistent hallucinations in any modality (but there may
be transitory or occasional auditory hallucinations that are not in the third
person or giving a running commentary).
E. Depressive symptoms (or even a depressive episode (F32.-)) may be
present intermittently, provided that the delusions persist at times when
there is no disturbance of mood.
F. Most commonl_y used exclusion clause. There must be no evidence of primary or
secondary organic mental disorder as listed under F00-F09, or of a psychotic disorder due to psychoactive substance use (Flx.5).

Annex 2

Specification for possible subtypes
The following types may be specified if desired: persecutory; litiginous; selfreferential; grandiose; hypochondriacal (somatic); jealous; erotomanic.
F22.8 Other persistent delusional disorders

This is a residual category for persistent delusional disorders that do not meet
the criteria for delusional disorder (F22.0). Disorders in which delusions are
accompanied by persistent hallucinatory voices or by schizophrenic symptoms
that are insufficient to meet criteria for schizophrenia (F20.-) should be coded
here. Delusional disorders that have lasted for less than 3 months should,
however, be coded, at least temporarily, under F23.-.
F22.9 Persistent delusional disorder, unspecified

F23 Acute and transient psychotic disorders
G1. There is acute onset of delusions, hallucinations, incomprehensible or
incoherent speech, or any combination of these. The time interval between the first appearance of any psychotic symptoms and the presentation of the fully developed disorder should not exceed 2 weeks.
G2. If transient states of perplexity, misidentification, or impairment of attention and concentration are present, they do not fulfil the criteria for
organically caused clouding of consciousness as specified for F05.-, criterion A.
G3. The disorder does not meet the symptomatic criteria for manic episode
(F30.-), depressive episode (F32.-), or recurrent depressive disorder
(F33.-).
G4. There is insufficient evidence of recent psychoactive substance use to fulfil1
the criteria for intoxication (Fl x.O), harmful use (Fl X.l ) , dependence
(Flx.2), or withdrawal states (Flx.3 and Flx.4). The continued moderate
and largely unchanged use of alcohol or drugs in amounts or with the
frequency to which the individual is accustomed does not necessarily rule
out the use of F23; this must be decided by clinical judgement and the
requirements of the research project in question.
G5. Most commonly used exclusion clause. There must be no organic mental
disorder (F00-F09) or serious metabolic disturbances affecting the central nervous system (this does not include childbirth).

A fifth character should be used to specify whether the acute onset of the
disorder is associated with acute stress (occurring 2 weeks or less before
evidence of first psychotic symptoms):
F23.xO Without associated acute stress
F23.xl With associated acute stress

Schizophrenia

For research purposes it is recommended that change of the disorder from
a non-psychotic to a clearly psychotic state is further specified as either abrupt
(onset within 48 hours) or acute (onset in more than 48 hours but less than
2 weeks).
F23.0 Acute polymorphic psychotic disorder without symptoms of schizophrenia

A. The general criteria for acute and transient psychotic disorders (F23) must
be met.
B. Symptoms change rapidly in both type and intensity from day to day or
within the same day.
C. Any type of either hallucinations or delusions occurs, for at least several
hours, at any time from the onset of the disorder.
D. Symptoms from at least two of the following categories occur at the same
time:
(1) emotional turmoil, characterized by intense feelings of happiness or
ecstasy, or overwhelming anxiety or marked irritability;
(2) perplexity, or misidentification of people or places;
(3) increased or decreased motility, to a marked degree.
E. If any of the symptoms listed for schizophrenia (F20.0-F20.3), criterion
G ( l ) and (2), are present, they are present only for a minority of the time
from the onset, i.e. criterion B of F23.1 is not fulfilled.
F. The total duration of the disorder does not exceed 3 months.
F23.1 Acute polymorphic psychotic disorder with symptoms of schizophrenia

A. Criteria A, B, C, and D of acute polymorphic psychotic disorder (F23.0)
must be met.
B. Some of the symptoms for schizophrenia (F20.0-F20.3) must have been
present for the majority of the time since the onset of the disorder, although
the full criteria need not be met, i.e. at least one of the symptoms in criteria
G1 (1)a to G1 (2)c.
C. The symptoms of schizophrenia in criterion B above do not persist for more
than 1 month.
F23.2 Acute schizophrenia-like psychotic disorder

A. The general criteria for acute and transient psychotic disorders (F23) must
be met.
B. The criteria for schizophrenia (F20.0-F20.3) are met, with the exception of
the criterion for duration.
C. The disorder does not meet criteria B, C, and D for acute polymorphic
psychotic disorder (F23.0).
D. The total duration of the disorder does not exceed 1 month.
F23.3 Other acute predominantly delusional psychotic disorders

A. The general criteria for acute and transient psychotic disorders (F23) must
be met.

Annex 2

B. Relatively stable delusions and/or hallucinations are present but do not
fulfil the symptomatic criteria for schizophrenia (F20.0-F20.3).

C. The disorder does not meet the criteria for acute polymorphic psychotic
disorder (F23.0).
D. The total duration of the disorder does not exceed 3 months.
F23-8 Other acute and transient psychotic disorders

Any other acute psychotic disorders that are not classifiable under any other
category in F23 (such as acute psychotic states in which definite delusions or
hallucinations occur but persist for only small proportions of the time) should
be coded here. States of undifferentiated excitement should also be coded here
if more detailed information about the patient's mental state is not available,
provided that there is no evidence of an organic cause.
F23-9 Acute and transient psychotic disorder, unspecified

F24 Induced delusional disorder
A. The individual(s) must develop a delusion or delusional system originally
held by someone else with a disorder classified in F20GF23.
B. The people concerned must have an unusually close relationship with one
another, and be relatively isolated from other people.
C. The individual(s) must not have held the belief in question before contact
with the other person, and must not have suffered from any other disorder
classified in F20-F23 in the past.

F25 Schizoaffective disorders

Note. This diagnosis depends upon an approximate "balance" between the
number, severity, and duration of the schizophrenic and affective symptoms.
G1. The disorder meets the criteria for one of the affective disorders (F30.-,
F3 1.-, F32.-) of moderate or severe degree, as specified for each category.
G2. Symptoms from at least one of the groups listed below must be clearly
present for most of the time during a period of at least 2 weeks (these
groups are almost the same as for schizophrenia (F20.0-F20.3)):

(1) thought echo, thought insertion or withdrawal, thought broadcasting
(criterion G1 (1)a for F20.0-F20.3) ;
(2) delusions of control, influence, or passivity, clearly referred to body or
limb movements or specific thoughts, actions, or sensations (criterion
G1 (1)b for F20.0-F20.3);
(3) hallucinatory voices giving a running commentary on the patient's
behaviour or discussing the patient among themselves, or other types
of hallucinatory voices coming from some part of the body (criterion
G1 (1)c for F20.0-F20.3);

Schizophrenia
(4) persistent delusions of other kinds that are culturally inappropriate
and completely impossible, but not merely grandiose or persecutory
(criterion G1 (1)d for F20.0-F20.3), e.g. has visited other worlds; can
control the clouds by breathing in and out; can communicate with
plants or animals without speaking;
(5) grossly irrelevant or incoherent speech, or frequent use of neologisms
(a marked form of criterion G1 (2)b for F20.0-F20.3);
(6) intermittent but frequent appearance of some forms of catatonic
behaviour, such as posturing, waxy flexibility, and negativism (criterion G1 (2)c for F20.0-F20.3).
G3. Criteria G1 and G2 above must be met within the same episode of the
disorder, and concurrently for at least part of the episode. Symptoms from
both G1 and G2 must be prominent in the clinical picture.
G4. Most commonl_y used exclusion clause. The disorder is not attributable to
organic mental disorder (in the sense of F00-Fog), or to psychoactive
substance-related intoxication, dependence, or withdrawal (F10-F 19).
F25.0 Schizoaffective disorder, manic type

A. The general criteria for schizoaffective disorder (F25) must be met.
B. Criteria for a manic disorder (F30.1 or F31.1) must be met.
F25.1 Schizoaffective disorder, depressive type

A. The general criteria for schizoaffective disorder (F25) must be met.
B. The criteria for a depressive disorder of at least moderate severity (F31.3,
F31.4, F32.1 or F32.2) must be met.
F25.2 Schizoaffective disorder, mixed type

A. The general criteria for schizoaffective disorder (F25) must be met.
B. The criteria for mixed bipolar affective disorder (F31.6) must be met.
F25.8 Other schizoaffective disorders
F25.9 Schizoaffective disorder, unspecified

Comments

If desired, further subtypes of schizoaffective disorder may be
specified, according to the longitudinal development of the
disorder, as follows:
F25.xO Concurrent affective and schizophrenic symptoms only
Symptoms as defined in criterion G2 for F25.
F25.xl Concurrent affective and schizophrenic symptoms, plus
persistence of schizophrenic symptoms beyond the
duration of affective symptoms

F28 Other nonorganic psychotic disorders
Psychotic disorders that do not meet the criteria for schizophrenia
(F20.0-F20.3) or for psychotic types of mood [affective] disorders (F30-F39),

Annex 2

and psychotic disorders that do not meet the symptomatic criteria for persistent delusional disorder (F22.-) should be coded here (persistent hallucinatory
disorder is an example). Combinations of symptoms not covered by the
previous categories F20-F25, such as delusions other than those listed as
typically schizophrenic under criterion G1 (1)b or d for F20.0-F20.3 (i.e. other
than completely impossible or culturally inappropriate) plus catatonia, should
also be included here.

F29 Unspecified nonorganic psychosis

